Danish Popular Legends.By Hans Christian Andersen.Denmark is rich in old legends of historical persons, churches, and
								manors, of hills, of fields, and bottomless moors; sayings from the
								days of the great plague, from the times of war and peace. The
								sayings live in books, and on the tongues of the people; they fly
								far about like a flock of birds, but still are as different from one
								another as the thrush is from the owl, as the wood-pigeon from the
								gull. Listen to me, and I will tell you some of them.It happened one evening in days of yore, when the enemy were
								pillaging the Danish country, that a battle had been fought and won
								by the Danes, and many killed and wounded lay on the field of
								battle. One of these, an enemy, had lost both his legs by a shot. A
								Danish soldier, standing near by, had just taken out a bottle filled
								with beer, and was about to put it to his mouth, when the badly
								wounded man asked him for a drink. As he stooped to hand him the
								bottle, the enemy discharged his pistol at him, but the shot missed.
								The soldier drew his bottle back again, drank half of it, and gave
								the remaining half to his enemy, only saying, »You rascal,
								now you will only get half of it.«The king afterward hearing of this, granted the soldier and his
								descendants an armorial bearing of nobility, on which was painted a
								half-filled bottle, in memory of his deed.There is a beautiful tradition worth telling about the churchbell of
								Farum. The parsonage stood close by the church. It was a dark night
								late in the fall, and the minister was sitting up atmukendt.A The Riverside Magazine for Young People. An
								Illustrated Monthly. Ill, New York 1870. October
									1870 s. 470-74. M. 1 ill.
									Findes i H. C. Andersons Hus, Odense, skænket af Jean
									Hersholt.a late hour preparing his sabbath sermon, when he heard a slight,
								strange sound from the large church-bell. No wind was blowing, and
								the sound was inexplicable to him; he got up, took the keys, and
								went into the church. As he entered the church the sound stopped
								suddenly, but he heard a faint sigh from above. »Who is
								there, disturbing the peace of the church?« he asked, in a
								loud voice. Footsteps were heard from the tower, and he saw in the
								passage-way a little boy advancing toward him.»Be not angry!« said the child. »I
								slipped in here when the Vesper Service was rung; my mother is very
								sick!« and now the little boy could not say more for the
								tears that choked him. The minister patted him on the cheek, and
								encouraged him to be frank, and to tell him all about it.»They say that my mother - my sweet, good mother
								- is going to die; but I knew that when one is sick unto
								death he may recover again and live, if in the middle of the night
								one dares enter the church, and scrape off a little rust from the
								large church-bell; that is a safeguard against death. Therefore I
								came here and hid myself until I heard the clock strike twelve. I
								was so afraid! I thought of all the dead ones, and of their coming
								into the church. I dared not look out; I read my Lord's
								Prayer, and scraped the rust off the bell.«»Come, my good child,« said the minister;
								»our Lord will forsake neither thy mother nor
								thee.« So they went together to the poor cottage, where
								the sick woman was lying. She slept quietly and soundly. Our Lord
								granted her life, and his blessings shone over her and her son.There is a legend about a poor young fellow, Paul Vendelbo, who
								became a great and honored man. He was born in Jutland, and had
								striven and studied so well that he got through the examination as
								student, but felt a still greater desire to become a soldier and
								stroll about in foreign countries. One day he walked with two young
								comrades, who were well off, along the ramparts of Copenhagen, and
								talked to them of his desire. He stopped suddenly, and looked up at
								the window of the Professor's house, where a young girl was
								seated, whose beauty had astonished him and the two others.
								Perceiving how he blushed, they said in joke, »Go in to
								her, Paul; and if you can get a voluntary kiss from her at the
								window, so that we can see it, we will give you money for
								travelling, that you may go abroad and see if fortune is more
								favorable for you there than at home.«Paul Vendelbo entered into the house, and knocked at the parlor door.»My father is not at home,« said the young girl.»Do not be angry with me!« he answered, and the
								blood rushed up into his cheeks, »it is not your father I
								want!« And now he told her frankly and heartily his wish
								to try the world and acquire an honorable name; he told her of his
								two friends who were standing in the street, and had promised him
								money for travelling on the condition that she should voluntarily
								give him a kiss at the open window; and he looked at her with such
								an open, honest, and frank face, that her anger disappeared.»It is not right for you to speak such words to a chaste
								maid,« said she; »but you look so honest, I will
								not hinder your fortune!« An she led him to the window,
								and gave him a kiss. His friends kept their promise, and furnished
								him with money. He went into the service of the Czar, fought in the
								battle of Pultowa, and acquired name and honor. Afterward, when
								Denmark needed him, he returned home, and became a mighty man of the
								army and of the king's council. One day he entered the
								Professor's plain room, and it was not just the Professor
								he wished to see this time either; it was again his daughter,
								Ingeborg Vinding, who gave him the kiss, - the
								inauguration of his fortune. A fortnight after, Paul Vendelbo
								Loevenoern (Lioneagle) celebrated his wedding.The enemy made once a great attack on the Danish island of Funen. One
								village only was spared; but this was also soon to be sacked and
								burnt. Two poor people lived in a low-studded house, in the
								outskirts of the town. It was a dark winter evening; the enemy was
								expected; and in their anxiety they took the Book of Psalms, and
								opened it to see if the psalm which they first met with could render
								them any aid or comfort. They opened the book, and turned to the
								psalm, »A mighty fortress is our God.« Full of
								confidence, they sang it; and, strengthened in faith, they went to
								bed and slept well, - kept by the Lord's
								guardianship. When they awoke in the morning it was quite dark in
								the room, and the daylight could not penetrate; they went to the
								door, but could not open it. Then they mounted the loft, got the
								trap-door open, and saw that it was broad daylight; but a heavy
								drift of snow had in the night fallen upon the whole house and
								hidden it from the23 Loevenoern] Loevendern fejlA.enemies, who in the night-time had pillaged and burnt the town. Then
								they clasped their hands in thankfulness, and repeated the psalm,
								»A mighty fortress is our God!« The Lord had
								guarded them, and raised an intrenchment of snow around them.From North Seeland there comes a gloomy incident that stirs the
								thoughts. The church of Roervig is situated far out toward the sand
								hills by the stormy Kattegat. One evening a large ship dropped
								anchor out there, and was presumed to be a Russian man-of-war. In
								the night a knocking was heard at the gate of the parsonage, and
								several armed and masked persons ordered the minister to put on his
								ecclesiastical gown and accompany them out to the church. They
								promised him good pay, but used menaces if he declined to go. He
								went with them. The church was lighted, unknown people were
								gathered, and all was in deep silence. Before the altar the bride
								and bridegroom were waiting, dressed in magnificent clothes, as if
								they were of high rank, but the bride was pale as a corpse. When the
								marriage ceremony was finished, a shot was heard, and the bride lay
								dead before the altar. They took the corpse, and all went away with
								it. The next morning the ship had weighed anchor. To this day nobody
								has been able to give any explanation of the event.The minister who took part in it wrote down the whole event in his
								Bible, which is handed down in his family. The old church is still
								standing between the sand hills at the tossing Kattegat, and the
								story lives in writing and in memory.I must tell you one more church legend. There lived in Denmark, on
								the island of Falster, a rich lady of rank, who had no children, and
								her family was about to die out. So she took a part of her riches,
								and built a magnificent church. When it was finished, and the
								altar-candles lighted, she stepped up to the altar-table and prayed
								on her knees to our Lord, that He would grant her, for her pious
								gift, a life upon the earth as long as her church was standing.
								Years went by. Her relations died, her old friends and
								acquaintances, and all the former servants of the manor were laid in
								their graves; but she, who made such an evil wish, did not die.
								Generation upon generation became strange to her, she did not
								approach anybody, and nobody approached her. She wasted away in a
								long dotage, and sat abandoned and alone; her senses were blunted,
								she was  like a sleeping,
								but not like a dead person. Every Christmas Eve the life in her
								flashed up for a moment, and she got her voice again. Then she would
								order her people to put her in an oak coffin, and place it in the
								open burying-place of the church. The minister then would come on
								the Christmas night to her, in order to receive her commands. She
								was laid in the coffin, and it was brought to the church. The
								minister came, as ordered, every Christmas night, through the choir
								up to the coffin, raised the cover for the old, wearied lady, who
								was lying there without rest.»Is my church still standing?« she asked, with
								shivering voice; and upon the minister's answer,
								»It stands still!« she sighed profoundly and
								sorrowfully, and fell back again. The minister let the cover down,
								and came again the next Christmas night, and the next again, and
								still again the following. Now there is no stone of the church left
								upon another, no traces of the buried dead ones. A large whitethorn
								grows here on the field, with beautiful flowers every spring, as if
								it were the sign of the resurrection of life. It is said that it
								grows on the very spot where the coffin with the noble lady stood,
								where her dust became dust of earth.There is an old popular saying that our Lord, when he expelled the
								fallen angels, let some of them drop down upon the hills, where they
								live still, and are called »Bjergfolk« (mountain
								goblins), or »Trolde« (imps). They are always
								afraid, and flee away when it thunders, which is for them a voice
								from heaven. Others fell down in the alder moors; they are called
								»Elverfolk« (alder folks), and among them the
								women are very handsome to look at, but not to trust; their backs
								are also hollow, like a dough-trough. Others fell down in old farms
								and houses; they became dwarfs and »Nisser«
								(elves). Sometimes they are wont to have intercourse with men, and a
								great many stories about them are related which are very strange.Up in Jutland lived in a large hill such a mountain goblin, together
								with a great many other imps. One of his daughters was married to
								the smith of the village. The smith was a bad man, and beat his
								wife. At last she got tired of it, and one day as he was going again
								to beat her, she took a horse-shoe and broke it over him. She
								possessed such an immense strength, that she easily could have
								broken him in pieces too. He thought about it, and did not beat her
								any more. Yet it was rumored abroad, and her respect among the
								country-people was lost, and  she was known as a »Trold
								barn« (an imp child). No one in the parish would have any
								intercourse with her. The mountain goblin got a hint of this; and
								one Sunday, when the smith and his wife, together with other
								parishioners, were standing in the church-yard, waiting for the
								minister, she looked out over the bay, where a fog was rising.»Now comes father,« she said, »and he
								is angry!« He came, and angry he was.»Will you throw them to me, or will you rather do the
								catching?« he asked, and looked with greedy eyes upon the
								churchpeople.»The catching!« she said; for she knew well that
								he would not be so gentle when they fell into his hands. And so the
								mountain goblin seized one after another, and flung them over the
								roof of the church, while the daughter, standing on the other side,
								caught them gently. From that time she got along very well with the
								parishioners; they were all afraid of the mountain goblin, and many
								of that kind were scattered about the country. The best they could
								do was to avoid quarreling with him, and rather turn his
								acquaintance to their profit. They knew well that the imps had big
								kettles filled with gold money, and it was certainly worth while to
								get a handful of it; but for that they had to be cunning and
								ingenious, like the peasant of whom I am going to tell you; as also
								of his boy, who was still more cunning.The peasant had a hill on his field, which he would not leave
								uncultivated; he ploughed it, but the mountain goblin, who lived in
								the hill, came out and asked, -»How dare you plough upon my roof?«»I did not know that it was yours!« said the
								peasant; »but it is not advantageous for any of us to let
								such a piece of land lie uncultivated. Let me plough and sow! and
								then you reap the first year what is growing over the earth, and I
								what grows in the earth. Next year we will change.« They
								agreed; and the peasant sowed the first year carrots, and the second
								corn. The mountain goblin got the top part of the carrots, and the
								roots of the corn. In this way they lived in harmony together.But now it happened that there was to be a christening in the house
								of the peasant. The peasant was much embarrassed, as he could not
								well omit inviting the mountain goblin, with whom he lived in good
								accord; but if the imp accepted his invitation,1 barn] barn fejlA.the peasant would fall into bad repute with the minister and the
								other folk of the parish. Cunning as the peasant ordinarily was,
								this time he could not find out how to act. He spoke about it to his
								pig-boy, who was the more cunning of the two.»I will help you!« said the boy; and taking a
								large bag, he went out to the hill of the mountain goblin; he
								knocked, and was let in. Then he said that he came to invite him to
								the christening. The mountain goblin accepted the invitation, and
								promised to come.»I must give a christening-present, I suppose;
								mustn't I?«»They usually do,« said the boy, and opened the
								bag. The imp poured money into it.»Is that sufficient?« The boy lifted the bag.»Most people give as much!« Then all the money in
								the large money kettle was poured into the bag.»Nobody gives more - most less.«»Let me know, now,« said the mountain goblin,
								»the great guests you are expecting.«»Three priests and one bishop,« said the boy.»That is fine; but such gentlemen look only for eating and
								drinking, - they don't care about me. Who else
								comes!« - »Mother Mary is
								expected!« - »Hm, hm! but I think
								there will always be a little place for me behind the stove! Well,
								and then?«»Well, then comes »our
								Lord«.« - »Hm, hm, hm! that
								was mighty! but such highly distinguished guests usually come late
								and go away early. I shall therefore, while they are in, slink away
								a little. What sort of music shall you have?«»Drum-music!« said the boy; »our Father
								has ordered a heavy thundering, after which we shall dance!
								drum-music it shall be.«»O, is it not dreadful!« cried the mountain
								goblin. »Thank your master for the invitation, but I would
								rather stay at home. Did he not know, then, that thundering and drum
								are to me, and my whole race, a horror? Once, in my younger days,
								going out to take a walk, the thunder began to drum, and I got one
								of the drumsticks over my thigh-bone so that it cracked. I will not
								have more of that kind of music! Give my thanks and my
								greetings.«And the boy took the bag on his back, and brought his master the
								great riches, and the imp's friendly greetings.We have many legends of this sort, but those we have told ought to be
								enough for to-day!Denne udgave trykkes af Bianco Lunos Bogtrykkeri A/S med DeVinne
								Antikva. Papiret er matglittet, fuldlimet træfrit
								trykpapir (100 g) fra A/S De Forenede Papirfabrikker.
								Helshirtingsbind til en del af oplaget udføres af
								Petersen & Petersen. Typografi, omslag og bind efter skitser
								af udgiveren. Vignet af Vilh. Pedersen efter Eventyr 1850, se II s. 170 og IV s. 12 (lidt formindsket,
								titel fjernet). Bind V planlagt til udsendelse 2. april 1967. The
								variant notes: © 1967 Hans Reitzels Forlag A/S.Printed in Denmark.