 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SAMLINGAR UTGIVNA AV SVENSKA FORNSKRIFT- SÄLLSKAPET Ser. 2 LATINSKA SKRIFTER Band VIII:3 SANCTA BIRGITTA OPERA MINÖRA III QUATTUOR ORACIONES 
 
 
 
 
 KUNGL. VITTERHETS HISTORIE OCH ANTIKVITETS AKADEMIEN STOCKHOLM REVELATIONES SANCTAE BIRGITTAE OPERA MINORA III QUATTUOR ORACIONES EDIDIT STEN EKLUND 
 
 
 
 
 SANCTA BIRGITTA OPERA MINORA III QUATTUOR ORACIONES EDITED BY STEN EKLUND 
 
 
 
 
 Published with the aid of grants from the Swedish Council for Research in the Humanities and Social Sciences Sancta Birgitta, Opera minora III, Quattuor Oraciones, ed. Sten Ek- lund. Kungl. Vitterhets Historie och Antikvitets Akademien and Svenska Fornskriftsällskapet, Ser. 2, Latinska skrifter, Band VIII:3, Stockholm, 1991. 122 pp. ISBN 91-971745-1-3. The Quattuor Oraciones were composed by St. Birgitta of Sweden and form a part of her Revelations. They have been edited with the aid of all the known MSS. The edition contains an introduction describing the history of the Latin and Old Swedish texts, the MSS and their interrela- tions, as weil as discussions of textual problems and issues such as the use of cursus. The Latin text is edited from a suitable sample of MSS and one hitherto unedited, Old Swedish version has also been printed. As is customary, certain indexes are included in the edition. Keywords: St. Birgitta, St. Bridget, Revelation, Quattuor oraciones, prayer, Vad- stena, spirituality. Sten Eklund, Department of Classical Philology, Uppsala University, Box 513, S-75120 Uppsala, Sweden. ISSN 0347-9145 ISBN 91-971745-1-3 Printed by Berlings, Arlöv, Sweden 1991 
 
 
 
 
 Contents Part A. Introduction 1. Preface 2 - Sten Eklund 7 9 2. Lists of manuscripts, printed literature and abbreviations 2.1. Latin manuscripts 2.2. Old Swedish manuscripts 2.3. Printed literature 2.4. Quotations and abbreviations 10 10 11 12 13 3. The history of the text 15 4. The E text, the Å text and the Old Swedish A text 16 5. The manuscript of the E text 19 6. The manuscripts of the A text (stemma codicum on p. 18) . 6.1. General remarks 6.2. The Revelations Tradition and the Celeste Viridarium Tra- dition 6.3. The relationship between A pt, Ha Ee 0 p LI3 Gh b 6.4. The relationship between µ p za 6.5. The relationship between b Nb K (W) 6.6. The relations within the h group 6.6.1. The relationship between I h i P2 29. — 6.6.2. The relation- ship between pi Y P (Ha) A" AaP 30. — 6.6.3. The relationship between (32 E H (On) B d Ab m 31. — 6.6.4. The relationship between o0 eEJ 32. 6.7. The relations within the 0 group 19 19 34 7. The manuscripts of the Old Swedish A text 36 8. The establishment of the texts and textual criticism 8.1. Choice of manuscripts 8.2. Cursus 8.3. Normalizations 8.4. Orthography 8.5. The order of the prayers 8.6. Omissions of complete paragraphs 8.7. Passages discussed 37 37 37 39 40 41 42 43 9. The apparatus 59 20 21 25 27 29 
 
 
 
 
 6 Part B. The Texts 61 10. The E text 63 11. The A text 65 12. The OSB (A) text 93 Part C. Indexes and Concordance Tables 109 13. Index of words 111 14. Grammatical index 113 15. Index of persons and places 117 16. Index of quotations and reminiscences 118 17. Concordance tables 120 
 
 
 
 
 PART A Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Preface The present edition of the Quattuor Oraciones constitutes the third and last volume in the series of the Opera minora of St. Birgitta of Sweden. As regards the edition of the Old Swedish A text from the OSB MS, I am greatly indebted to Prof. Lennart Moberg and Prof. Börje Tjäder, both of Uppsala, who checked my reading of the MS. I would also like to express my thanks to Neil Tomkinson BA, who not only checked the English of all three volumes but also, from his long experience of book-printing, gave me much good advice. 
 
 
 
 
 2. Lists of manuscripts, printed literature and abbreviations As regards the dates of the manuscripts, I do not go into detail in the list, and more information and discussions are often provided in the literature cited for each MS. Concerning the contents, I just indicate which of the three versions of the QO (E, A, A, see Chapters 4-6) the MS has and its position in the MS. Small Greek index letters are used to distinguish different parts of one and the same MS whenever necessary. As regards the literature on the MSS, I give just one or two main references, from which further information may be gathered. 2.1. Latin manuscripts B = Berlin Staatsbibl. (Stiftung Preussischer Kulturbesitz), MS theol. lat. fol. 33, 15th century. Foll. 281v-285r: the Å text. Lit.: Eklund, SA, p. 10; Bergh, Rev. V, p. 7; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 170 ff.. E = Edinburgh, Univ. Lib., MS 86, 15th century. Foll. 304v-310r: the A text. Lit.: Undhagen, Rev. I, p. 177. H = New Haven, Yale Univ. Lib., MS 24 (earlier Z 109.031), 15th century. Foll. 304v- 310v: the A text. Lit.: Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 178 f. J = Cambridge, St. John's College, MS C 19, 15th century. Foll. 297v-302v: the A text. Lit.: Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 181 f. K = Kalmar Stifts- och Gymnasiebibl. (earlier Läroverksbibl.), end of the 14th century. Foll. 242r-246r: the Å text. Lit.: Eklund, RS, p. 10; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 96 ff. L = London, British Museum, Cod. Harleianus 612, 15th century (middle part). Lit.: Eklund, RS, p. 10; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 182 ff. = columns 595-597: the 0 text (= §§ 64-83 of the A text) LP = columns 627-635: the A text. 0 = Oxford, Balliol College, MS 225, 15th century (first half). Foll. 203r-206v: the A text. Lit.: Eklund, RS, p. 10; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 185 f. P = Palermo, Bibl. Nazionale, MS fol. IV G 2, 14th century. Foll. 199v-202r: the A text. Lit.: Eklund, RS, p. 10; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 150 ff. Y = New York, The Pierpont Morgan Lib., Morgan MS 498, about 1400. Foll. 409(102)r- 414(107)r: the A text. Lit.: Eklund, SA, p. 11; Bergh, Rev. V, p. 7; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 156 ff. Aa = Milan, Bibl. Nazionale Braidense, Cod. Lat. AD XIV 23, 15th century. Lit.: Eklund, RS, p. 11; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 162 ff. The A text of the QO has been entered twice in extenso in this MS and, since there are no folio numbers in my microfilm, the two versions have to be identified as follows: A' = The first entering of the A text, located after Rev. VIII and before the RS. ikal3 = The second entering of the Å text located after the SA and before the Officium beate Birgitte. Ha = Munich, Bayerische Staatsbibl., Clm. 18361, 15th century. Foll. 232v-237r: the A text (yet, for the order of the prayers in this MS, see section 8.5). Lit.: Eklund, SA, p. 12; Undhagen, Rev. I, p. 128. Oa = Katrineholm, Ericsbergs slottsbibliotek (Library of Ericsberg Castle), 15th century. Foll. 108 and 174v-176r: the Å text of the QO III-IV and I-II respectively. Lit.: Bergh, Rev. VII, p. 42; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 187 ff. 
 
 
 
 
 2.2. OLD SWEDISH MANUSCRIPTS 11 Za = Helsinki, Univ. Lib., Codex Nordenskiöld, 15th century (former part). Foll. 44r-50r: the A text (the beginning of the text is lost; it starts with § 19). Lit.: Eklund RS, p. 11. Ab = Darmstadt, Hessische Landes- und Hochschulebibl., MS 733, about 1400. Foll. 275r- 278v: the A text. Lit.: Bergh, Rev. V, p. 7; Eklund, SA, p. 11; Undhagen, Rev I, pp. 200 ff. Nb = Uppsala, Univ. Lib., Cod. C 480. Foll. 16v-29r: the A text (cf. section 8.5). Ob = Oslo, Riksarkivet, Lat. fragm. (eske 24) 614. Contains §§ 42-50 of the E, text. Pb = Oslo, Riksarkivet, Lat. fragm. (eske 34) 818. Contains §§ 15-19, 25-26 and 27-28 of the A text. Ad = Oxford, Bodleian Lib., MS Canon. Misc. 475, 15th century. Foll. 58v-59v: the 0 text (=§§ 64-83 of the A text). Lit.: Eklund, SA, p. 13. Bd = Cividale, Archivio Capitolare Duomo di Cividale, no sign, 1392. Foll. 100r-102v: the 0 text (=§§ 64-83 of the A text). 1 Ee = Siena, Bibl. comunale, Cod. G XI 20, 15th century (former part). Foll. 46r-52r: the A text. Lit.: Eklund, RS, p. 12. Gh = Ghotan, the editio princeps, see section 2.2. d = Dösseldorf, Landes- und Stadtbibl., MS C 94, 1461-1467. Foll. 375v-380v: the A text. Lit.: Eklund, SA, p. 11; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 192 f. e = Oxford, Merton College, MS 215, 15th century. No folio numbers, the A text at the end of the MS. Lit.: Eklund, SA, p. 11; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 193 f. m = Mainz, Stadtbibl., MS 404, 15th century. Foll. 402r-407v: the A text. Lit.: Eklund, SA, p. 12; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 194 f. o = Oxford, Bodleian Lib., MS 346 (earlier 2418), 15th century. Foll. 153v-156v: the A text. Lit.: Eklund, RS, p. 16; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 195 f. p = Stockholm, Royal Lib., Cod. A 22, 15th century. Foll. 94v- 98v: the A text. Lit.: Eklund, RS, p. 16. 2.2. Old Swedish manuscripts In order that the signs B F G H should not be mistaken for the Latin MSS B F G H, I have added the abbreviation 0(1d) Swedish) to these MSS (cf. Eklund, RS, pp. 16 f.). OSB = Stockholm, Royal Lib., Cod. A 29, 16th century. Fol. 28v-38v: the A text (edited here on pp. 93 ff.). Lit.: Eklund, RS, p. 17. OSF = Stockholm, Royal Lib., Cod. A 27, 15th century. Fol 2r-9v: the A text (edited in BU 4, pp. 146-158). Lit.: Svenska Medeltids-postillor .. . utgifna af G.E. Klemming, 1 (SFSS 23,1), Stockholm 1879, pp. 303 f.; BU 5, p. 157. OSG = Stockholm, Royal Lib., Cod. A 36, 15th century. Fol. 34v-53r: the A text (edited in BU 4, pp. 132-146). Lit.: BU 5, pp. 156 f. OSH = Stockholm, Riksarkivet, Skokloster, Cod. 8, 16th century. Foll. 62r-72v and 84r-87v: the A text (edited in SvB, pp. 114-122, 218-223 and 321-326). Lit.: SvB, pp. XLI sqq. 1 Several years ago, a colleague (unfortunately I cannot recall who it was) informed me of the existence of this manuscript. On undertaking this edition of the QO, I checked the Bd MS during a summer stay in Cividale. 
 
 
 
 
 12 2. LISTS OF MANUSCRIPTS, PRINTED LITERATURE AND ABBREVIATIONS 2.3. Printed literature The list below contains only books, which have been quoted in abbreviated form somewhere in the present edition. For more exhaustive information, I refer the reader to the previous editions (A&P; Hollman; Undhagen, Greg.; Bergh, Rev. VII and Rev. V; Eklund, SA and RS; Undhagen, Rev. I.) and to A. Sträng, Den svenska Birgitta-litteraturen 1945-1972 (KÅ 73, 1973, pp. 159-167). A&P = Acta et processus canonizacionis beate Birgitte, ed. I Collijn (SFSS, Ser. 2,1), Uppsala 1924-1931. ALMA = Bulletin du Cange, Archivum Latinitatis Medii Aevi I sqq., Paris 1924-. Bergh, Rev. V = Sancta Birgitta, Reuelaciones, Book V, ed. B. Bergh (SFSS, Ser. 2,7,5), Uppsala 1971. Bergh, Rev. VII = Den heliga Birgittas Reuelaciones, Book VII, ed. B. Bergh (SFSS, Ser. 2,7,7), Diss., Uppsala 1967. Birgitta corpus = Machine-readable text collection containing the Revelations of St. Birgitta (Rev. I-VIII and her minor works). The collection has been produced by Prof. Birger Bergh, of Lund University. BU = Heliga Birgittas Uppenbarelser 1-5, ed. G.E. Klemming (SFSS 14), Stockholm 1857- 1884. Du Cange = C. Du Fresne Du Cange & L. Favre, Glossarium mediae et infimae Latinitatis I-X, Niort 1883-1887, repr. Graz 1954. Eklund, A Reassessment = S. Eklund, A Re-assessment of the Old Swedish Bridgettine Text Corpus, Kungl. Humanistiska Vetenskaps-Samfundet i Uppsala, Årsbok 1983-1984, pp. 5 ff. Eklund, Cursus = S. Eklund, The Use and Abuse of Cursus in Textual Criticism, ALMA 43, 1984, pp. 27 ff. Eklund, Errors = S. Eklund, On Errors and Contamination, Kungl. Humanistiska Veten- skaps-Samfundet i Uppsala, Årsbok 1975-76, pp. 73 ff. Eklund, RS = Sancta Birgitta, Opera minora I, Regula Saluatoris, ed. S. Eklund (SFSS, Ser. 2,8,1), Stockholm 1975. Eklund, SA = Sancta Birgitta, Opera minora II, Sermo Angelicus, ed. S. Eklund (SFSS, Ser. 2,8,2), Uppsala 1972. Forcellini = A. Forcellini & V. De-Vit, Totius latinitatis lexicon I-VI, Prato 1858-1875. Geete, see SvB. Georges = K.E. Georges, Ausfiihrliches lateinisch-deutsches Handwörterbuch 1-2, Han- over-Leipzig 1913-1918. Gh = Revelaciones Sancte Birgitte, ed. B. Ghotan, Liibeck 1492 (editio princeps). GMLS = Glossarium mediae latinitatis Sueciae I sqq. Stockholm 1968 ff. Hollman = Den Heliga Birgittas Reuelaciones Extrauagantes, ed. L. Hollman (SFSS, Ser. 2,5), Diss., Uppsala 1956. Janson = T. Janson, Prose Rhythm in Medieval Latin from the 9th to the 13th Century (Acta Universitatis Stockholmiensis, Studia Latina Stockholmiensia 20), Stockholm 1975. Jönsson = A. Jönsson, Alfonso of Ja&I, His Life and Works with Critical Editions of the Epistola Solitarii, the Informaciones and the Epistola Servi Christi (Studia Graeca et Latina Lundensia 1), Diss., Lund 1989. Kezel = Birgitta of Sweden, Life and Selected Revelations, ed., with a preface by M.T. Harris, Translation and Notes by A.R. Kezel, Introduction by T. Nyberg (The Classics of Western Spirituality), New York 1990. Klemming, see BU. 
 
 
 
 
 2.4. QUOTATIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS 13 KÅ = Kyrkohistorisk Årsskrift 1 ff., Uppsala 1900 ff. Leg. Aur. = Jacobus a Voragine, Legenda Aurea, ed. T. Graesse, 3rd ed. 1890, repr. Osnabriick 1969. Lindholm = G. Lindholm, Studien zum mittellateinischen Prosarhythmus (Acta Universita- tis Stockholmiensis, Studia Latina Stockholmiensia 10), Diss., Stockholm 1963. Lunden = Den Heliga Birgitta, Himmelska uppenbarelser 1-4, till svenska av T. Lun&n, Malmö 1957-1959. Maas = P. Maas, Textkritik, 4. Aufl., Leipzig 1960. MDB = Middelalderens Danske Bonneboger 1-5, ed. K.M. Nielsen, Copenhagen 1946- 1982. SFSS = Samlingar utgivna av Svenska fornskriftsällskapet, Serie 2, Latinska skrifter 1 ff., Stockholm 1924 ff. SvB = Svenska böner från medeltiden. ..utgifna af R. Geete (SFSS 38), Stockholm 1907- 1909. Szantyr = J.B. Hofmann & A. Szantyr, Lateinische Syntax und Stilistik (Handbuch der Altertumswissenschaft 2,2,2), Munich 1965. TLL = Thesaurus linguae Latinae I sqq. Leipzig 1900 ff. Undhagen, Greg = Birger Gregerssons Birgitta-officium, ed. C.-G. Undhagen (SFSS, Ser. 2,6), Diss., Uppsala 1960. Undhagen, Rev I = Sancta Birgitta, Reuelaciones, Book I, ed. C.-G. Undhagen (SFSS, Ser. 2,7,1), Uppsala 1978. 2.4. Quotations and abbreviations Books I, V and VII of St. Birgitta's Revelations, the Extrauagantes, the Sermo Angelicus, the Regula Saluatoris and the writings of Bishop Alfonso have been quoted from the editions made by Undhagen, Bergh, Hollman Eklund and Jönsson (section 2.3) and other texts of the Birgitta corpus from the Ghotan edition (see Gh in section 2.3). The abbreviations used for the quotations are listed below together with other abbreviations. add. adj. adv. cett. cf. cod(d). corr. CV del. des. ed. eras. ES Ex. exc. exp. f. = addidit, addiderunt = adjective = adverb = ceteri (-ae -a) = confer, compare = codex, codices = correxit, correxerunt = Celeste Viridarium = delevit, deleverunt = deest, desunt = edited = erasit, eraserunt = Bishop Alfonso's Epistola Solitarii = S. Birgitta's Reuelaciones Extrauagantes = excepto (-a, -is), except = expunxit, expunxerunt = feminine 
 
 
 
 
 14 2. LISTS OF MANUSCRIPTS, PRINTED LITERATURE AND ABBREVIATIONS f(f). = following fol(1). = folium, folia, folio(s) ibd. = ibidem Lib. = Library lin. = linea (lineae etc.) loc. = locavit, locaverunt m. = masculine marg. = margo (marginis etc.) MS(S) = manuscript(s) n. = neuter om. = omisit, omiserunt Or. I-IV = Oracio I-IV (of the QO) = page(s) p(p)• QO = St. Birgitta's Quattuor Oraciones ras. = rasura (-m) Rev. I-VII = St. Birgitta's Revelations, Books I-VII RS = St. Birgitta's Regula Saluatoris SA = St. Birgitta's Sermo Angelicus scil. = scilicet sq(q). = sequens, sequentes suppl. = supplevi(t), suppleverunt trsp. = transposuit, transposuerunt v. = verb A question mark (?) in the apparatus indicates that the information given about a MS is not beyond doubt (owing, for example, to bad writing, to ambiguous abbreviations, to difficulty of reading the original text when corrections have been entered or to the difficulty of tracing erasures in microfilms and photocopies). — Index figures have been used to distinguish an original scribe (for example, K1) from a later corrector (K2); see Chapter 9 for details. — In this volume, as in the Opera minora I-II, the use of italics has, for the sake of clearness, been exclusively restricted to quotations from the texts and manuscripts discussed. 
 
 
 
 
 3. The history of the text Almost nothing is known about the origin of the QO. Opinions are divided as to whether they were included in the so-called First Alphonso redaction (= one or, maybe, two different but very similar redactions presented to papal commissions in 1377 and 1378); see Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 13 ff. Undhagen opines that the QO was probably first included in the so-called Second Alphonso redaction, which Alphonso completed around 1380. However, the QO must have been older than that, since St. Birgitta is said to have prayed them herself2 and since they have always been regarded as a genuine part of the Birgitta corpus and, therefore (unlike the so-called Quindecim Oraciones), were included in the Ghotan edition. However, some achievements have been made during the preparation of the present edition. The most important one is the discovery that the Old Swedish text reflects the original QO text much better than does the Latin text (except for the Latin of one small fragment Ob; see the following chapter). In the OSB text, the incipit of the 00 runs thus: Thxsse bone varo sancte birgitto af thcem hxlgha anda kcende oc bewiste Oc x sidhen hwan dagh plxghade hon thcem [hwar dagh] Icese mz myklom gudhelich. 2 
 
 
 
 
 4. The E text, the A text and the Old Swedish A text Up till recently, one Latin version and one Old Swedish version of the QO were known. The Latin version is the one printed in the editio princeps, Gh, and handed down in several MSS; in the present edition, it has been termed the A text. The Old Swedish version is known from four MSS and has been signed A. During the preparation of the present edition, Dr. Lilli Gjerlow, of Oslo, kindly drew my attention to some fragments of the QO text preserved in Riksarkivet in Oslo. It turned out that one of them, a single leaf, which has been designated 0" in the present edition, is extremely important, since it contains eight paragraphs of the QO in an hitherto unknown Latin version, which is shorter than the A text. This version has been termed the E text. I have accounted elsewhere for the relations between the A, E and A texts and, for that reason, I will give here just a summary of the results, leaving aside the detailed argumentation (for a full report, see Eklund, A Reassessment). The two Latin texts A and E have so many similarities (sometimes there is complete concordance) that the Old Swedish text, A, cannot be an intermediate stage between them, i.e. the possibility is excluded that the Latin A text was translated into the Old Swedish A text, which was then in turn retranslated into the Latin E text (or the other way round, E > A > A). The Old Swedish A text and the fragmentary Latin E text are very similar and differ from A as regards the order of the prayers. Furthermore, Å has a good many additional expressions intermingled throughout the text, which are not in E and A. The very marked similarity between the A and E texts means that, if A is a translation made from the Latin, it must be a translation of the E text, not a translation of the A text. If, on the other hand, the A text is an original text, from which the Latin was produced, then the A text must be the original of the E text, not the original of the A text. A doser comparison of the two Latin texts, A and E, based on stylistic, grammatical and contextual features, has shown that the E text is an older and ruder text, from which a reviser produced the richer and more elaborate Å text. To sum up, the A text is a polished version of the E text, and the E and A texts are closely related (see Fig. 1) A E A N A Fig. 1 Fig. 2 
 
 
 
 
 4. THE E TEXT, THE Å TEXT AND THE OLD SWEDISH A TEXT 17 As regards the relations between E and A, there are no reliable indications. Omissions of some paragraphs in the A text point to the A text being a translation made from the 111, text, but the possibility is by no means excluded that the A text is an original, from which the E text was produced (Fig. 2). The most important consequence of the results just outlined is that the Old Swedish A text represents an earlier stage of the QO text than the Latin A text, both as regards the arrangement and as regards the wording. This in turn means that the A text is important when editing the d text, since it may sometimes give the clue when the A MSS disagree. As regards the E. text, it is very much to be regretted that only a small fragment has survived, but it is to be hoped that, somewhere in some library, a complete MS of this text is waiting to be discovered. In the discussions above, the designations "the A text", "the E text" and the "the A text" have been used of each text, as such, without referring to any particular manuscript of the text. In the continued description, the same Greek letters, i.e. A, E and A, will be used to designate the archetype of each text, i.e. the oldest (lost) MS of each text, which can be reconstructed from the extant MSS by means of the stemma technique. The relation between each of these archetypes and the original of each text remains open to doubt. Generally speaking, an archetype with errors, which the author himself could possibly not have commit- ted, cannot be identical with the original. If there are no such errors, the question is open and the archetype may or may not be identical with the original. As regards the A text, the archetype A has no such errors, which exclude the possibility that the lost Å MS was in reality the original. Thus, although I have located the "Original of the A text" above the lost A MS in the stemma diagram (p. 18), the "Original. . ." and the lost A MS could, nevertheless, be identical. There is the same ambiguity as regards the "Original of the E text" and the archetype E, in this case primarily owing to the fact that only a small fragment of the E text has survived. Furthermore, in this case, also the Ob MS could be identical with E and there is, theoretically, the possibility that Ob sho. uld take the place of E in the stemma diagram and that Ob is, at the same time, the original of the E text. Also as regards the Old Swedish original and its archetype A, there is ambiguity, mainly because the relations have not been investigated. In the following discussions, I shall reserve the term "author" for the person who created the oldest traceable text (the "Original of the E text"), and the term "(d) reviser" for the person who created the "Original of the d text". 
 
 
 
 
 18 4. THE E TEXT, THE A TEXT AND THE OLD SWEDISH A TEXT O .- - - - - STEMMA CODICUM 4 1 4 E denotes that the exact connection cannot be traced Tt 3 
 
 
 
 
 5. The manuscript of the E text Only one folio has survived of the Oh MS, which once contained the E text. The surviving paragraphs, i.e. 42-50, have been printed on pp. 63 f. 6. The manuscripts of the A text 6.1. General remarks The stemma of the A text is partly similar to the stemma of the SA (and also the stemmata of Rev. I, V and VII). Yet the text is shorter than the SA text and indubitable errors are so rare that it turned out to be difficult to produce a complete stemma diagram based exclusively on the errors in the QO text. For that reason, it has sometimes been necessary to confirm the results gained from the QO text by comparisons with the stemma of the SA text (and the stemmata of the other books of the Revelations, primarily Rev. I, which is the most complete stemma and the latest published one). The difficulties are not diminished by the fact that a comparatively extensive contamination is involved in the tradition. However, the following mechanism is, so to speak, built into the stemma tech- nique. When the MSS are good, with few errors in them, it is hard to produce a stemma, but, at the same time, the stemma is not so desperately needed, since there are comparatively few and unimportant errors to correct. When the MSS are bad and full of errors, it is generally easy to draw the stemma diagram and the stemma is a very useful tool. Now, most of the QO MSS are of the former type, with few errors in them. This means that the text established is comparatively reliable, although there may be doubts concerning certain parts of the stemma. In describing the stemma below, I shall sometimes use the terms "manifest error" and "latent error". I have described these terms elsewhere (Eklund, Errors) and outlined how the two types of errors may be used in stemma-building; here I shall just give a short definition. A manifest error satisfies these three conditions: (a) The error must be obvious when judged from the point of view of syntax and/or content (occasionally it is obvious also for stylistic, lexical or metrical reasons). (b) The error must be of such a kind that it is highly unlikely that two copyists committed it independently. (c) The error must be of such a kind that the correct reading cannot easily be conjectured. A latent error, on the other hand, 
 
 
 
 
 20 6. THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE A TEXT satisfies only conditions (b) and (c) but not condition (a). A latent error is present whenever two MSS offer two (or more) variants, both of which may have been in the original as far as syntax, content, etc. are concerned; one of them must be an error, but it is impossible to tell which one from the syntax or content.3 In the stemma of the QO text, the latent errors are especially important, since it is every now and then possible to pass judgement on them with the aid of the Old Swedish text, thanks to the fact that this text is located above the A archetype in the stemma (see Chapter 4 above). 6.2. The Revelations Tradition and the Celeste Viridarium Tradition The A text has come down to us in two ways. First, it appears in MSS which contain the other revelations of St. Birgitta (more or less completely) and/or other texts related to St. Birgitta, viz. Y P AaaA43 o0eEJOallBdAb mr Ha EepGh Nb K. These MSS and the Li3 MS, for which see below, are all derived from the A archetype and the tradition has been termed "the Revelations Tradition".4 Secondly, the third prayer of the A text, i.e. A 64-83, has been incorporated in and forms an integral part of the middle of the so-called Celeste Viridarium (abbreviation CV). The CV is a compilation of revelations concerning St. Mary made by the Spanish bishop Alfonso da Vadaterra, probably around 1380 (cf. Jönsson, pp, 65 ff.) and it has been handed down in three MSS, viz. La (not Le', for which see below) Ad Bd.5 These MSS, of course, are subordinate to an archetype of the CV which has been designated 0. When Alfonso composed the CV, he must have taken the third prayer, i.e. A 64-83, from some lost MS of the Revelations Tradition and inserted them in the CV. Consequently, as far as this piece of text is concerned, the archetype of the CV (0) represents a lost MS of the Revelations The requirements (a)-(c) and the division into manifest errors and latent errors apply whenever the errors are used to bring MSS together in groups (so-called "Bindefehler", cf. Maas, p. 26). When the errors are used to exclude the possibility that a MS (or a group of MSS) is derived from another MS (so- called "Trennfehler", cf. Maas, p. 26), conditions (a) and (b) are of less interest; the main demand is that condition (c) applies. 4 For the sake of convenience, I include the editio princeps, Gh, in the lists under the designation of MS, although it is in reality not a MS. I also use the designation MS for Aa“ and Aka6, although they are actually two different parts of one and the same MS (the same goes for L" and Lf3; see the list of MSS). — The fragment Pb also belongs within the Revelations Tradition, but it is so short that its position in the stemma cannot be defined (it may be related to the B MS, since both B and Pb add an et before miraculis in A 16) and it does not contribute to the establishment of the text. Therefore, the Pb fragment has been left aside in the following discussions. — As regards the 0' MS, it was not possible for me to check the original or to get a microfilm copy. Its location in the stemma as an ancestor of H is based on previous research (see subsection 6.6.3) and it is represented in the discussions below by the H 3 MS. When I edited the SA, I knew of only two of these MSS, viz. L and Ad. 5 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN A µ H' E' O p Ii' Gh 21 Tradition and should be incorporated in the stemma as a subordinate of A in exactly the same way as other lost MSS of the Revelations Tradition. Thus, the La text consists of 0 64-83 of the QO incorporated in the middle of the CV and, accordingly, belongs to the CV tradition. However, the QO (in extenso) appears once more in the L MS, viz. at the end of the CV. This text has been termed LP and requires some discussion. The L MS is divided into 14 books, of which the CV forms Book 10. The complete 00-text at the end of the CV, i.e. LP, is clearly pointed out in the L MS as part of the CV, both by the column headings (Celeste Viridarium) and by the explicit after the QO text (Explicit liber decimus). But this is curious; why should Alfonso, in composing the CV, have picked out Å 64-83 of the QO and located them in the middle of the CV (= La) and then repeated himself by locating the complete QO (including §§ 64-83) at the end of the CV (= LP)? The suspicion arises that the 00-text at the end of the CV (= I 3) was actually not in the original CV, a suspicion which is confirmed by the fact that there is no 00-text at the end of the CV in the two other CV MSS (i.e. Ad and Bd). For that reason, I have classified LP as not belonging to the CV tradition but to the Revelations Tradition (it may be added that Lt3 does not have errors in common with La Ad Bd) . In describing the stemma of the A MSS below, I have printed some parts (mostly those which deal with the lower parts of the stemma diagram) in small print, since they are not so essential to the reconstruction of the text. 6.3. The relationship between 4 p.t, Ha Ee 0 p LI3 Gh b In establishing the top of the A stemma, there are two important passages to be considered, both from the same paragraph, i.e. A 66 honorentur and A 66 tue . . . potestati. The second passage will be discussed first. At the end of § 66, the MSS offer three main variant readings, which I have numbered (a) — (c) in the quotation: A 66 (a) tue subiaceant et obediant potestati Nb K1 (imperio et ante potestati supra lin. suppl. K2) (b) tuo subiaceant et obediant imperio et potestati Y P Aa« AaP o (tuo ante imperio loc. 0)0eEJHBdAb mr Ee Ad Bd (c) tue subiaceant et obediant imperio et potestati Ha La p Lt3 (subiacent LI3) Gh. Now, it will be shown in section 8.7 below that alternative (a) is perfectly correct and was probably in the original of the A text. Alternative (b) is correct but inferior to alternative (a) and is less likely to have been in the original, whereas alternative (c), finally, is a manifest error and was not in the original. It is necessary, before drawing any conclusions concerning the Revelations MSS based on this passage, to discuss briefly the CV archetype 0, since the three 0 MSS, Ad Bd disagree (see the stemma on p. 18; the relations between 0 and La Ad Bd will be established in section 6.7 below). One of them, La, offers the erroneous reading (c) tue... imperio et potestati, the two others have the syntacti- 3 — Sten Eklund 
 
 
 
 
 22 6. THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE A TEXT A ) tue... potestati 111 (c) tue . . . imperio et potestati Ha 0 p LP Gh (a) tue . . . potestati Nb K1 (b) tuo . . . imperio et potestati Y P A' AaP o 0 eEJHBdAb mZar Fig. 3 (b) tuo potestati (b) tuo imperio et potestati Y P Aa" AaP o0eEJHBdAb mZa A imperio et (c) tue . . . imperio et potestati Ha 0 p LP Gh Ee (a) tue . . . potestati Nb Kl Fig. 4 A (b) tue . . . imperio et potestati pi (b) tuo imperio et potestati Y P A" AaP o 0eEJHBdAb mZa (a) tue . . . potestati Nb K1 E' (c) tue . . . imperio et potestati p LP Gh Ha 0 Fig. 5 
 
 
 
 
 6.3 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN Å [I H' E' O p Lt' Gh h 23 imperio et potestati. Under these circumstances, it cally correct reading (b) tuo is most likely that 0 had the error (c) tue . . . imperio et potestati, which was handed down to L«, whereas the more or less obvious conjecture (b) tuo . . . imperio et potestati was made in the Ad Bd ancestor. This is more likely than that the archetype 0 had the reading (b) tuo . . . imperio et potestati, which was impaired to (c) tue... imperio et potestati by coincidence or by contamination in L . I have assumed that the erroneous (c) reading tue... imperio et potestati was in 0 and in the discussion below, I list 0 as a representative of this reading (but do not mention the individual 0 MSS La Ad Bd). Now we may consider the Revelations MSS, including 0. The most plausible explanation of the passage from A 66 based on the evaluation of the three alternative readings seems to be this one (cf. Fig. 3). Alternative (a) tue . . . potestati, i.e. the reading which is most likely to be the correct one, was in the archetype A and in a lost MS, which we may term b, the error (c) tue... imperio et potestati arose by the insertion of imperio et in a lost MS termed g,. Later on, this obvious error was corrected by a change of tue to tuo, which conjecture is certainly a very likely one; thus alternative (b) tuo ... imperio et potestati was produced. This explanation is outlined in Fig. 3 and it means that the Ha 0 p LP Gh MSS as weil as all of the Y P Ad" AaPoOeEDIBdAb mZaEeMSS must be subordinate to g. Furthermore, the latter MSS, i.e. YPA'AaPoOeEJHBdAb mZaEe, must be subordinate to one or more lost MS(S), in which the erroneous (c) reading tue . . . imperio et potestati was corrected to the (b) reading tuo . . . imperio et potestati. This correction is a very likely one and may have been made indepen- dently on several occasions; accordingly, theYPA'AaPoOeEJHBdAb mZa Ee MSS do not necessarily form one single subgroup within the g group. According to Fig 3, the existence of the Nb K ancestor is not indicated by the passage from A 66, since Nb K have the same reading as the archetype A, viz. tue . . . potestati. However, this relationship will be further established below (section 6.5) and has been introduced here in Fig. 3 for the sake of simplicity. Now, Fig. 3 is based on the assumption that alternative (a) tue . . potestati was in the archetype A. It is also possible, however, although more unlikely, that alternative (b) tuo . . imperio et potestati was the correct reading (section 8.7). Assuming that this reading was in the archetype A, one arrives at the diagram shown in Fig. 4. The error (c) tue imperio et potestati arose in an ancestor of W 0 p LP Gh Nb K, which has been termed ö and was corrected to (a) tue . . . potestati in an Nb K ancestor. This is not as probable a solution as the one in Fig 3. First of all, the reading (b) tuo . . . imperio et potestati is inferior to (a) tue . . . potestati, since it forms no cursus (section 8.7) and, furthermore, it seems unlikely that a copyist responsible for the Nb K1 ancestor should have corrected the erroneous (c) reading tue... imperio et potestati by removing imperio et instead of changing tue to tuo (unless, of course, he was very skilled and aimed not only at correcting the syntax but also at creating a cursus velox). Furthermore, there is no argument in favour of a solution according to Fig. 4 (except, maybe, the fact that the A reviser 
 
 
 
 
 24 6. THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE Å TEXT was very fond of doublets, cf. the discussion of the passage in section 8.7). If Fig. 4 should, nevertheless, hold true, it implies that the Y P A'AaPoOeEJHBdAb m Za Ee MSS have the reading of the archetype and such a state of affairs is actually no indication that they should form a group (g), as shown in Fig. 4. However, since it will be shown in the following section that (with the exception of Ee) they do really form the pi group, this configuration has been adopted here in Fig. 4. There is also Fig. 5, which presents the most unlikely solution. It holds true if the error (c) tue . . . imperio et potestati was in the archetype A and was handed down from there to Ha 0 p LP Gh (which in this case do not necessarily form a group); the corrections (b) tuo . . . imperio et potestati and (a) tue . . . potestati were produced as shown in the figure. This solution has the same drawbacks as the one shown in Fig. 4 and, if the archetype A and the original of the A text are identical, it would also mean that the A reviser himself, who was, indeed, very careful, committed the mistake tue... imperio et potestati (cf. the discussion in section 8.7 below)6. As regards the pt group, Fig. 5 does not prove its existence, which will, however, be further proved below (section 6.4). Now, the other Å 66 passage may be taken into consideration: honorentur Y P A'AaPoOeEJHBdAb m Za Ad Bd (honerentur Bd) ornentur W Ee (hornentur Ee) La p LP Gh Nb K. In this passage, there is an indication that honorentur is correct and ornentur is erroneous (see section 8.7). Disregarding for the moment the 0 MSS La Ad Bd (for which see below), this passage seems strongly to support Fig. 4. The error ornentur arose in b, from which MS it was handed down to Ha p LP Gh Nb K. However, the error may have been committed independently on more than one occasion; as a matter of fact, there must have been alterations of 6 In discussing Fig. 3 above, I used as an argument in favour of Fig. 3 the fact that the reading (a) tue . . . potestati was probably the correct one and here I have used the syntactical error tue... imperio to discredit the reading (c) tue . . . imperio et potestati. Someone may object that this holds true of the original of the Å text but not necessarily of the archetype A, namely if the archetype was not identical with the original and had another reading than the original. Since the objection may seem justified and since matters of principle are involved here, an explanation is called for. Let us assume, in Fig. 5, that the original was located above the archetype A and had the correct reading (a) tue . . potestati (or some other reading, which is not preserved in any MS), whereas the archetype A had the error tue . . . imperio et potestati, which situation matches the requirements of the objection. This leads to a more complex explanation than the one in the discussions above. Changes must have occurred on three occasions at least, whereas only two changes are implied if the original of the A text and the archetype had the same reading (or were identical). Since it is a basic rule of stemma technique that a simple solution has the advantage over a complex solution (unless there are other arguments in favour of the complex solution), it is not advisable, in our case, to assume a different reading in the original and in the archetype and, accordingly, the argumentation based on the inferiority of the reading (c) tue . . . imperio et potestati is valid. In more general terms, this rule may be laid down: normally the reading of an archetype is identical with the reading of the original and a difference is not to be assumed until there is a positive indication of such a difference. 
 
 
 
 
 6.4 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN [ip Za 25 the text on at least two occasions, since not only the MSS of the Revelations Tradition disagree, but also the 0 MSS La Ad Bd . Under these circumstances, the passage cannot be used to rule out Fig. 3 (or Fig. 5). Thus, there are arguments in favour of Fig. 3 as weil as of Fig. 4 and both these alternatives are plausible, whereas the solution outlined in Fig. 5 is, perhaps, more unlikely. Now, considering the three alternatives, as they are expressed in Figs. 3-5, one finds that, in all three of them, there are two branches, the g branch, always including Y P A" Aa[3 o 0 e E J H B d Ab m Za, and the b branch, always including Nb K. The uncertainty is limited to the position of Ha Ee 0 p LE3 Gh. This means that the left-hand branch (g) should be reconstructed from a suitable selection of the Y P Aaa Aar3 o0eEJHBdAb mr MSS and the right-hand branch (b) from Nb K. These two branches are of equal value in reconstructing A; less attention should be paid to the Ha Ee 0 p Lt3 Gh MSS, because their position in the stemma is somewhat open to doubt. The Ha MS is especially useless, since it has very many errors and since it had apparently at least two different sources, one probably close to Y P (subsection 6.6.2) and one probably close to Nb (section 6.5). It should be borne in mind that the Old Swedish text, A, is very important when reconstructing the A text, since A represents an older stage of the text than does A. 6.4. The relationship between p Za It was stated in the preceding section that, if Fig. 3 (p. 22) was true, then the Y P A'AaPoOeEJHBdAb mr Ee Ha 0 p 1 3 Gh MSS formed the g group. If, on the other hand, Fig. 4 or 5 was true, there was nothing in the passages discussed there to prove the existence of the g group. In this section, the affinity of the Y P A'Aaf3 o0eEJHBdAb mZaMSS will be further proved by the establishment of the p subgroup and by sorting out the relations between p and Za. It is convenient to start by establishing the p group, which consists of the Y P A' AaPoOeEJHBdAb mMSS, and there are three passages which are useful in doing this: A 6 hec oracio (sequens oracio B oracio siue meditacio subscripta E J) fuit a Deo reuelata beate Birgitte (Birgitte sepedicte B virginis post Birgitte add. et del. d), in qua... laudatur . . . Virgo Maria Y P A'Aaf3 o0eEJHBdAb m in ista oracione (oracione sequenti Lf 3 Nb) a Deo reuelata beate Birgitte . . . laudatur . . . Virgo Maria Ha Ee p Lf-3 Gh Nb K des. Za 0; A 14 preciosissimis Y P A" Aaf3 o0eE J H B Ab m preciosis Ha Ee p Lf3 Gh Nb K ex preciosis in preciosissimis corr. d des. Za 0; A 95 tua membra semper mouebantur Y P Aaf3 o0eEJBd Ab m Za membra tua semper mouebantur H membra tua mouebantur Ha Ee p Li3 Gh Nb K tua membra mouebantur A' deest 0. Let us leave aside, for the time being, the Za MS, which is incomplete and does not have the passages from A 6 and 14, and the 0 MS, which does not have any of the passages. It appears that Y P A" A4 o0eEJHBdAb mgo together and 
 
 
 
 
 26 6. THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE A TEXT likewise that Ha Ee p LI3 Gh Nb K agree with each other, except for some minor, unimportant deviations.7 In the passage from A 14, there is some indication that the W Ee p LP Gh Nb K reading is correct (section 8.7 below), which points to the YPA'Aal3 o0eEJHB(d)Ab m MSS forming a group with an ancestor in common, in which the erroneous reading arose. In the passage from A 95, there are no indications from the syntax or the content, but the Old Swedish version shows that the addition of semper is probably an error (section 8.7), which means that also this passage links theYPAal3 o0eEJBdAb m (for A" and H, see note 7) MSS together (in this case also Za, for which see below). In A 6, finally, there are no indications from the syntax or the content, nor from the Old Swedish version (section 8.7). This passage means either one of two things. If the Ha Ee p LR Gh Nb K reading was in A, it further strengthens the relationship between the Y PA'AaPoOeEJHBdAb niMSS, if the Ha Ee p LP Gh Nb K reading was not in A, it shows that not only do Nb K form the left-hand branch but also that Ha Ee p LP Gh belong to this branch. Thus, there are indications that theYPA"Aaf3 o0eEJHBdAb m MSS form a group and this may be confirmed by comparisons with the previously edited parts of the Birgitta corpus. In the SA stemma (Eklund, SA, p. 22), theYPAao0eBd Ab m MSS (and some other MSS which do not contain the QO) form one group derived from a lost MS termed p (the E J H MSS are not in the SA stemma). Furthermore, in Rev. I (Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 170, 199 and, concerning Ab, pp. 200 f. and 211), it turns out that all the QO MSS under discussion, i.e. Y P Aa 0 0 e E J H B d Ab in (and some other MSS which do not contain the QO) form the p group. Thus, referring both to indications from the QO text itself and to comparisons with other Bridgettine texts, one may quite safely assume that the YPA' A' 0 0 eEJHBdAb mMSS form a group and are all derived from a common ancestor, which may be termed h (see the stemma diagram on p. 18). As regards Za, this MS has the p error in one of the three passages quoted above (A 95) and, in the two other passages (A 6 and 14), there is no Za text, since the beginning of the QO is missing in Za. This distribution would certainly allow us to include Za in the f group (assuming that Za had originally, when it was once complete, the f readings in A 6 and 14), which in turn would mean that f and itt are identical and that g could be replaced in the stemma by R. However, in the SA stemma, I found indications that Za did not belong within the f group but was (together with some other MSS which do not contain the QO) derived from a lost 7 In A 14, the d MS does not offer preciosissimis but a correction from preciosis to preciosissimis and in A 95 the Aaci and H MSS each have their own mixture of the readings offered by the other MSS. I trust that these deviations are due to coincidence (in Å 95, semper may have dropped out independently in Akaa) or, maybe, to contamination. Anyway, they are so unreliable that no conclusions can be based upon them and they do not interfere with the conclusions drawn from the passages. 
 
 
 
 
 27 6.5 THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN h Nb K (Ha) MS, termed t, which was also an ancestor of p (Eklund, SA, p. 22). Since this solution is also in accordance with the errors in the QO text, it has been adopted. Thus, 11 and Za have been regarded as twin MSS, both being derived from g. There are two comments to be made. First of all, the location of Za is somewhat open to doubt and, accordingly, Za should not be trusted as much as p — Za could, after all, belong within the 13 group. Secondly, the diagram chosen implies that the error in Å 95 did not arise in Q but in t. However, this does not diminish its value in indicating that theYPA'Aaf3 o0eEJHBdAb mMSS belong together; the only doubtful point is the location of Za, whether it is a twin MS of 13 or belongs within the p group. In the following section, i.e. 6.5, will be described the relations of the right-hand stemma branch, i.e. the relations between b Nb K, and after that there follow the relations within the 11 group (6.6) and the relations within the 0 group (6.7). 6.5. The relationship between b Nb K (Ha) In section 6.3 above, the ö group, consisting of Nb K, was found to constitute the right-hand stemma branch. However, this conclusion was valid only if either one of the solutions offered by Figs. 4-5 was true; if Fig. 3 was preferred, there was no evidence that Nb K formed a group. In the present section, it will first be demonstrated that Nb K really go together, forming a group (the ö group, which then constitutes the right-hand stemma branch in accordance with the consider- ations in section 6.3) and, secondly, the relations between b Nb K will be specified. There are several passages in which Nb K agree against all the other MSS. Since these passages are important for more than one reason, I will list them below. In some of them, the K2 corrector has entered corrections, but it is still sometimes possible to trace the readings of the original scribe (i.e. KI), as is the case in A 17 (bis), 30 (?) and 83; on other occasions, the K2 correction is written in an erasure, the length of which suits the Nb reading (A 54; 69; 70 [?]). Some of the passages are unreliable, since the errors could have been committed twice independently (e.g. A 17 postea or A 98), but I did not exclude them, preferring the list to be complete:8 A 17 captivari antea Nb K1 (debere supra lin. suppl. K2) debere captivari antea cett. (captivari debere antea o ex ante captivari in debere captivari antea corr. d des. Za 0); A 17 postea m N" K1 (eum supra lin. suppl. Nb supra lin. in ras [?] suppl. K2) eum postea cett. (tamen postea Ha des. Za 0); A 27 domina mea o Virgo Maria Nb K o domina mea Virgo Maria cett (o om. Za E' deest 0); A 28 morte Nb 8 The purpose of the list is not only to link Nb K together but also to present all cases in which the two stemma branches disagree, i.e. passages which must be considered later on, when the text is estab- lished. 
 
 
 
 
 28 6. THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE Å TEXT morte tua K tua morte cett. (deest 0); A 30 (tua ante morte supra lin. suppl. cognouisti Nb agnouisti (a- in ras. [litterarum co- ?1) K agnouisti cett. (agniouisti Ee deest 0); A 32 tu domina mea Virgo Maria Nb K tu o domina mea Virgo Maria cett. (o ante tu loc. A' deest 0); A 34 amor Nb K amor meus cett. (meus supra lin. d deest 0); A 42 caritatem . . . humiliter ostendisti Nb K humilitatem . . . humiliter ostendisti cett. (deest 0); A 46 ab eodem Nb K ab eo cett. (des. o 0); A 54 promisisti N" misericorditer promisisti in ras. octo fere litterarum K2 misericorditer promisisti cett. (misericorditer ante promisisti scripsit et del. W deest 0); A 64 ideo licet sim Nb K ideo ego licet sim cett. (ideo licet ego sim La ex ideo licet ego sim in ideo ego licet sim corr. W ex ideo ego scilicet sim in ideo ego licet sim corr. p); A 69 tue et eterno omni Nb tue et eternaliter omni in ras. K2 tue et eternaliter omni cett. (tue et eternaliter cum J tue eternaliter omni H Ab m Ee ex tue eternaliter et omni in tue et eternaliter omni corr. d); A 70 impendatur Nb eternaliter impendatur in ras. K2 eternaliter impendatur cett. (eternaliter impendantur Ad Bd eternaliter impenditur Ha) ; A 73 ideo sit benedicta Nb K idcirco benedicta sit cett. (idcirco sit benedicta E); A 83 dolore Nb K1 LR dolore tuo K2 cett.; A 85 et mater Dei Nb K mater Dei cett. (deest 0); Å 86 cum capillis N" K cum capillis tuis cett. (ex capillislis in capillis corr. E; deest 0); A 98 firmissime Nb K d firmissima cett. (deest 0). Now, as regards these passages, there are three possibilities. If Nb K are wrong in all of them, they prove that Nb K form a group. If Nb K are right in all of them, they prove that all the other MSS form a group. If N" K are wrong in some of them and right in others, both the conclusions just mentioned may be drawn (at least if there are "reliable" passages of both categories). In some of the passages, viz. in A 27, 54, 69 and 86 (cf. also 42), there are indications that the Nb K readings are erroneous (see section 8.7 below for the argumentation) and, on account of them, the Nb K MSS have been taken to form a group. In the other passages, there are no indications as to which reading was actually in A (for A 64, see section 8.7). This implies a difficulty when the text is to be established and a choice has to be made. I have consistently printed the g readings, because they are backed by (most of) the Ha Ee 0 p LP Gh MSS. If Fig. 4 above holds true, then a FtHa Ee 0 p L13 Gh reading must necessarily have been in A and a Nb K reading could not have been there. If Fig. 3 holds true, either a Ft Ha Ee 0 p LP Gh reading or a Nb K reading could have been in A. Thus, a p reading, when supported by (most of) the Ha E' 0 p LP Gh MSS, have, so to speak, a somewhat higher probability from the stemmatic point of view than the Nb K readings. But, of course, the Nb K reading could, after all, have been in A in (some of) these passages. There remain the relations between b, Nb and K. Since both Nb and K have errors specific to them, none of them could be an ancestor of the other one and identical with h, but they must both branch out from ö, as shown in the stemma diagram. Examples of Nb errors and K errors: A 38 baptista post Lohanne add. N" (des. W o Ee 0) ; A 50 tuisque . . . portasti om. N" (deest 0); A 79 tuis (post brachiis) om. Nb; A 19 sine omni misericordia K instead of sine aliqua misericordia 
 
 
 
 
 6.6 THE RELATIONS WITHIN THE r3 GROUP 29 (deest 0); Å 64 teneor reddere tibi K instead of tibi teneor reddere; A 76 tuorum post electorum add. K. At the end of section 6.3 above, it was stated that the Ha MS, which holds an unspecified position in the stemma diagram, had at least two sources, one of which may have been located close to Nb. Although there are certain indications, they have not been judged reliable enough to include Ha in the b group. On six occasions, Ha has some minor errors in common with Nb and/or K, but they are not reliable enough to serve as evidence, especially since the Ha MS offers a very bad text with a huge mass of errors specific to it (the best of them is Å 78 extremi Ha Nb extre(n)ui Ee p LP Gh K stren(n)ui cett. [exc. P] ex extrenui in strenui corr. P, see section 8.7). Furthermore, Nb and Ha both deviate from all the other Å MSS in having the prayers in the order Oracio secunda, Oracio tercia, Oracio prima, Oracio quarta, i.e. the same order as in the E and A texts. It is possible that this order was introduced in some ancestor common to W N13 .9 On the other hand, the order could have been changed twice independently (this will be further discussed in section 8.5 below). Under these circumstances, it did not seem justified to introduce an ancestor common to Ha Nb in the stemma diagram, although the possibility is by no means to be rejected (cf. also the omission of Å 45 in Ha and a corresponding miswriting in Nb, section 8.6 below). Under all circumstances, W is a very bad and heavily contaminated MS. 6.6. The relations within the p group In the following subsections, the relations within the [I group will be outlined. In these discussions, it will be possible to use both manifest and latent errors (cf. section 6.1). A latent error is present whenever some MSS in the [I group offer one reading, whereas the other MSS in the f3 group and all the MSS outside the f group offer another reading. In such cases, the former reading is erroneous. In the passages quoted in the preceding sections, it has been mentioned in parentheses whenever some MS(S) do not have the part of QO in question (e.g. des. Za 0). Such information is not equally necessary in the following subsections and has been omitted in order to simplify the accounts. It should be borne in mind that the beginning of the QO is missing in Za, i.e. Za has Å 19-103, and that the 0 MSS, i.e. La Ad Bd have only §§ 64-83 of the A text. 6.6.1. The relationship between R pi 02. Four of the (3 MSS, viz. Y P A& tka(3, are held together by one latent error: A 26 degens Y P A' Aaf3 instead of tu degens (the omission is 9 There is one peculiar detail in Ha which may have some connection with relocations having been made, although its impact cannot be specified, viz. the fact that A 6 appears on two occasions, in its normal position before Å 7 and also at the very end of the text, after Å 103. 
 
 
 
 
 30 6. THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE A TEXT also in Ha, which may indicate a relationship between Ha and Y P, see subsection 6.6.2). This alone is not good evidence, but, since the Y P Aa MSS (and some other MSS which do not contain the QO) form a group in the stemmata of the SA and Rev. I (Eklund, SA, p. 22; Undhagen, Rev. I, p. 148), they have been taken to form a group here as weil; the ancestor common to Y P Aaa Aaf3 is termed 131 . The remaining (3 MSS, i.e. o 0 e E J H B d Ab m, are held together by common errors, e.g. A 19 glorioso suo o 0 e E J H B d Ab m instead of suo glorioso; A 58 a iudice licencia o O e E J B (e licenciam in licencia corr. B) d Ab m instead of licencia a iudice; A 96 Virgo Maria virtus mea et dulcedo mea o (mea ante et om. o) O e E J H B d Ab m instead of virtus mea et dulcedo mea. In A 58, the H MS offers the correct reading, which may be due to coincidence or to contamination. All three passages must be regarded as latent errors.10 On account of them, the o 0 e E J H B d Ab m MSS have been taken to constitute a group, all being derived from a lost ancestor, which has been termed 132. This conclusion is confirmed by a comparison with the stemmata of the SA (Eklund, SA, p. 22) and Rev. I (Undhagen, Rev. I, p. 148, and, as regards Ab, p. 211). The hi MS cannot be subordinate to 132, owing to the 02 errors; nor is 132 likely to be subordinate to Ill , owing to the 131 error. Thus, pi and 132 are both derived from h, as shown in the stemma diagram. This is also in accordance with the stemmata of the SA and Rev. I (Eklund, SA, p. 22; Undhagen, Rev. I, p. 148). 6.6.2. The relationship between 131 Y P (Ha) A" A. There are two errors common to Y P (and Ha) and the former is a manifest error (the content is bad with the two missing words), whereas the latter is a latent error: A 26 iam in celo sedentem om. Y (in marg. suppl. Y) P Ha; A 83 et in fine pro nobis eos duris clauis cruci affigi permisisti om. Y (in marg. suppl. Y) P Ha (homoioteleuton ?). Leaving Ha aside for the moment being, we may take Y and P to form a group with an ancestor in common, in which the two errors arose, especially since Y and P are related in this way, both in the SA and in Rev. I (Eklund, SA, p. 22; Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 169 f.). The P MS has errors specific to it which mean that P cannot be an ancestor of Y: A 65 angelico P (and Za)instead of angelorum; A 91 ipse aures tue mundissime P instead of ipse aures tue; A 101 et fructum dulcissimum P instead of fructum dulcissimum. The Y MS does not have errors of its own and could, for that reason, be an ancestor of P. The situation was the same in the SA text and there I, nevertheless, found it safer to take Y to be a twin, not an ancestor of P (in that case contamination was involved, see Eklund, SA, pp. 28 f.). Afterwards, Undhagen found errors specific to Y in Rev. I (Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 168 f.) and, accordingly, took Y and P to be derived from a common ancestor. With regard to this, it seems safer to adopt the same solution here in the QO than to take Y to be an ancestor of P. However, this means that the Y MS, not the P MS, should be used in establishing the text. In the passage from Å 96, one could perhaps argue that the reading without Virgo Maria is likely to be correct on the following basis. In almost all invocations of St. Mary in the 00, there are the words Virgo Maria (there are many such passages, viz. Å 7-32, 86-95, 98-100, 102); on two occasions only, the words Virgo Maria are missing (Å 85 and 97). One could argue that it is likely that Virgo Maria was missing in A 96 but was added by some scribe, who was influenced by the usual mood of expression. On the other hand, Virgo Maria may have been in Å and dropped out on account of some scribe's carelessness; there is a parallel to this in A 23, in which paragraph Virgo Maria was in the original and dropped out in the P MS. Thus, the passage from A 96 does not constitute a manifest error but only a latent error. 10 
 
 
 
 
 6.6 THE RELATIONS WITHIN THE 13 GROUP 31 There remains the Ha MS, which shares the errors of Y P in the two passages quoted above. It was stated above that Ha was a bad MS, which had at least two sources (see the end of section 6.3), one of which was probably located close to Nb (section 6.5). The concordance with Y P indicates that another source of Ha was located close to Y P. This idea is further strengthened by the fact that Ha shares the omission of tu in A 26 with Y P A" Aaf3 (subsection 6.6.1 above). On the other hand, Ha does not share theµ and p errors (sections 6.3 and 6.4) which, however, may be due to the contamination of the Ha text. The position of Ha has been left unspecified in the stemma. As regards A' and AaP, there are many errors common to them and they form a group with a common ancestor. As a matter of fact, Aaa and Aa13 are just two different entries of the QO in one and the same MS (i.e. Aa) and the Aaa Aaf3 errors point to the two entries having been made from the same original. Examples of A" Aa(3 errors (the first one is a manifest error, the other two are latent errors): A 96 manus A" Aa13 instead of et manus; A 12 diuina potestate et maiestate A' Aat3 instead of diuina maiestate; A 75 sustentacionem et redempcionem A' Aa13 instead of redempcionem. The A' Aa/3 ancestor cannot be subordinate to the Y P ancestor or vice versa, owing to the Y P errors and the A" Aat3 errors. Thus, the two ancestors must derive from (31, as shown in the stemma diagram. This is in accordance with the results gained in the editions of the SA and of Rev. I (Eklund, SA, p. 22; Undhagen, Rev. I, p. 170). 6.6.3. The relationship between 112 e H (On) B d Ab m. The o 0 e E J MSS are held together by common errors, e.g. (the first one is a manifest error [see section 8.7], the two others are latent errors): A 86 caesaries o 0 e E J instead of caesaries tua; A 12 non amissa o0 e E J instead of non tamen amissa; A 75 perfecte om. o 0 e E J. Thus, the o 0 e E J MSS form a group with an ancestor in common. This ancestor has been termed e (which is in accordance with the stemmata of the SA and of Rev. I, see Eklund, SA, p. 22, and Undhagen, Rev. I, p. 199). The relations within the e group will be discussed below (subsection 6.6.4). The d Ab m MSS are clearly held together by common errors, e.g. (the first two are manifest errors, in the third case the Old Swedish version indicates that the omission of caritatis is erroneous): A 23 videntibus om. d (supra lin. suppl. d) Ab m; A 77 obtinuit d Ab m instead of obtinuisti; A 24 caritatis om. d (in marg. suppl. d) Ab m (OSB 62 leterlek).11 Thus, the d Ab m MSS form a group. Within this group, the Ab m MSS have errors in common. The first passage is a manifest error (since the ears have been praised already in A 69 and since the context of A 70 demands the reading nares); the others are latent errors; in the first two passages also the Swedish text indicates which reading is correct: A 70 aures Ab m instead of nares (OSB 31 ncesa); A 24 in anima Ab (aliter antea in marg. add. Ab) m instead of antea (OSB 62 forre); A 61 cordibus et ante spiritibus add. Ab m; A 64 et graciarum acciones post gracias add. Ab m. The m MS cannot be an ancestor of Ab, since m has errors of its own, e.g. A 48 duci pacientissime om. m; A 91 omnem om. m; A 99 tamen om. m. The errors specific to Ab are so few and insignificant that they do not exclude the possibility that Ab is in itself an ancestor of m. This is the same result as I reached in the SA stemma concerning Ab (Eklund, SA, p. 50) and Undhagen (Rev. I, p. 211) has also concluded that Ab might very well be an ancestor of m. I have checked all those passages, in which m has errors of its own, in the Ab MS to see whether the writing in Ab could have caused the error. In such passages, in which m has errors such as in for idest, quia for qui or et for eciam, there are abbreviations consisting of just one letter and an abbreviation mark in Ab. Furthermore, 11 The corrections in d were entered from the B MS (see note 13) and, accordingly, do not reflect the d ancestor. 
 
 
 
 
 32 6. THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE A TEXT the m omission of duci . . . pacientissime in A 48 (above) corresponds to one line in Ab, duci being the second word on one line and pacientisime being the first word on the following line; the finger or the eye of the scribe probably slipped from the first line to the second one. Although there is no absolutely convincing proof, I have taken Ab to be an ancestor of m with regard to these indications. On some occasions, the m MS offers errors, which are in Ab but have been corrected there; thus, the corrections were entered in Ab after the m MS was produced. The d MS cannot be subordinate to Ab, owing to the Ab m errors (above). Nor can Ab be subordinate to d, since d has many errors specific to it, e.g. A 10 per om. d; A 25 virginem et matrem d instead of virginem matrem; Å 97 domina Maria d instead of domina mea. Accordingly, d and Ab must be twin MSS, both derived from a lost MS, as shown in the stemma diagram. The establishment of the 0' H group is based entirely on previous research (Bergh, Rev. VII, pp. 44 f., and Undhagen, Rev. I, p. 199), since it was not possible for me to check the original of 0' or to get a microfilm copy of it. It should be remembered, in connection with this, that both Bergh and Undhagen found that H is derived from the corrected text in 0'. Now there remain the relations between 112 E (0a) H B and the d Ab m ancestor. There are no reliable errors in the 00 text and no reliable conclusions can be drawn from the previous editions. Bergh once (Rev. VII, pp. 44-45 and 48-50) showed that B and d were closely related and took B to be an ancestor of d. He also pointed out the possibility that m contained contaminated text. Apart from this, he admitted that the relations were more or less obscure. In the SA edition (Eklund, SA, pp. 30 f.), I proved that B could not be an ancestor of d and assumed a diagram slightly different from that of Bergh. Also Undhagen (Rev. I, p. 199) points out the lack of combining errors and the uncertainty as regards the internal relations. After all, it seems obvious that contamination is involved to such an extent that no reliable diagram can be drawn.12 For that reason I have just marked the subordination under 112 by means of broken lines. It should be added that the B and d MSS were probably collated with each other.13 6.6.4. The relationship between E o 0 e E J. The O e E J MSS have errors in common which show that they form a group, e.g. A 81 super (ante omnium puritatem) om. 0 e E J; Å 89 pudentissimi 0 e J prudentissimi E instead of pudicissimi; A 97 Dei Filium O e E J instead of The different instances of contamination cannot be specified. Bergh (Rev. VII, p. 49) pointed to the possibility that the m text was contaminated. In the SA edition (Eklund, SA, p. 31), I found no such traces; neither are there any in the QO text. As regards the d MS, I pointed to the possibility of contamination (Eklund, SA, p. 31, Prol. 4 respondebat/respiciebat); here in the QO text, there is no apparent contamination. In the text of the B MS, on the other hand, there may be contamination, as appears from A 47 sustinuisti Ha 1,4 in ras. K2 sustinuisti seu sustulisti B instead of sustulisti. The reading sustulisti was in A and the error sustinuisti arose on more occasions. The B text may be explained by the assumption that the B scribe (or rather some predecessor of his) had two sources, one with sustinuisti and the other with sustulisti and was unable to make a choice. However, it is perhaps more likely that he had just one source but that the word was so badly written that he could not settle for either sustulisti or sustinuisti. Since the existence of contamination in B cannot be fully proved, it has 12 not been marked in the stemma diagram. 13 In the SA text, I found some evidence that corrections had been entered from d to B and vice versa (Eklund, SA, p. 31). Such a correction process probably took place also as regards the QO text, at least corrections were entered in d from B: A 102 corporis tui gloriosissimi B d (gloriosissimi supra lin. d) instead of corporis tui. 
 
 
 
 
 6.6 THE RELATIONS WITHIN THE [3 GROUP 33 Filium Dej; cf. also A 23 in section 8.7 below (the removal of per in the O e E J ancestor and some other MSS). Owing to these errors, the o MS cannot be included in the O e E J group. Nor can o in itself be an ancestor of the O e E J group, since o has many errors of its own, e.g. A 33 actibus et om. o; A 46 et te . . . permisisti om. o; A 90 quia per illas numquam mundanam gloriam ostendisti o instead of quia illas numquam pro mundana pompa vel vana gloria ostendisti. Accordingly, o and the O e E J group are derived independently from E, as shown in the stemma diagram. Within the O e E J group, the e E J MSS have comparatively many errors in common and form a group (the first of the examples is a manifest error): A 13 vtero om. e E J; A 30 omnium om. e E J; A 42 durissime e E J instead of dignissime. The 0 MS cannot be included in the e E J group; nor can 0 in itself be an ancestor of the e E J group, since 0 has errors of its own, although they are only four in number (contamination ?, cf. below), and at least one of them is very insignificant: A 42 gloriosum 0 instead of preciosum; A 70 occulabatur 0 instead of osculabatur; A 74 tua (ante facie) om. 0; A 97 aqua om. 0. Thus, 0 and the e E J group must be derived independently from a lost ancestor, as shown in the stemma diagram. So far, the result is in accordance with the SA stemma, although the group in that stemma consists only of the o 0 e MSS (the E J MSS do not contain the SA). In the Rev. I stemma, Undhagen has dealt with all of the o 0 e E J MSS (and some other MSS which do not contain the QO). He arrived at the same result as I did above but he did so more or less intuitively, since he only found evidence that e J went together (this will be discussed below) but no indications as regards the relations between this e J group and the o (= the o I L group in Undhagen's stemma) 0 E MSS (Undhagen, Rev. I, pp. 196-198). 14 Now there remain the relations between the e E J MSS. As I have just pointed out, both Bergh and Undhagen found that e J went together. In the QO text, there are no indications of such a relationship; on the contrary, there are some minor errors common to E J, but they are few and insignificant, as, for example, the transposition A 70 Lazari mortui E J instead of mortui Lazari. One interesting passage, however, is A 65 sanares 0 e saluares E J instead of saciares. It seems likely that the error sanares arose mechanically in an ancestor of 0 e E J (from a palaeographical point of view, it is easy to see how -ci- can be mistaken for -n-) and that, later on, the scribe of an ancestor of E J disliked the content and substituted saluares for sanares. But the evidence is not strong and I have just marked an unspecified subordination to an e E J ancestor. It should be added that E and J each have errors specific to them, e.g. A 33 seriosa . . . incarnacione om. E; A 43 qualiter caritatem tuam habebas E instead of taliter caritatem tuam quam habebas; A 96 Dej ad te om. (dej supra lin. suppl.) E; A 34 dilectissime om. J; A 42 consecrasti om. J; A 91 maris om. J. Thus, neither E nor J can be an ancestor of any other MS in the e E J group. As regards e, there are only these three minor errors specific to the MS: A 22 et ante resuscitatum add. e; A 28 disponsatam e (and m) instead of desponsatam; A 76 in collo e instead of et collo. These errors do not seem to 14 Already in the Rev. VII edition, Bergh (pp. 45 ff.) found that 0 e E J formed a group and that e J went close together within this group. There were no errors to allow of a specification of the relations between the e J subgroup and the 0 E MSS. However, concerning o, Bergh argued that there was contamination involved, meaning that o had one source in the vicinity of the O e E J group and another source in the vicinity of the E MSS I and L. However, since the I MS does not contain the 00 and, holds an unspecified position in accordingly, does not appear in the QO stemma, since the L MS (= the QO stemma and since there is no trace of contamination of the QO text in o, I have not marked any such influence in the stemma (just as I did not in the SA stemma, see Eklund, SA, p. 29). 
 
 
 
 
 34 6. THE MANUSCRIPTS OF THE A TEXT exclude definitely the possibility that e was an ancestor of E J, but, since there are no positive indications of such a relation and since e has errors specific to it in the Rev. I stemma (Undhagen, Rev. I, p. 196), e has not been classified as an ancestor.15 It is possible that the 0 text is contaminated; there are two passages pointing in this direction, viz. A 95 foliorum e E J liberorum o instead of liliorum; A 100 delectantur et (ac o) pascuntur o e E J instead of delectanter pascuntur. In the first passage, an error, probably foliorum, may have arisen in e; in o the error is further developed to liberorum, but 0 offers the correct text, which may have been introduced into 0 from a source outside the E group. However, there are other solutions as weil: the correct reading in 0 is a conjecture or the correct reading may have been in e and have been handed down to 0, in which case the o reading and the e E J reading are two independently committed errors. In the second passage, the error delectantur pascuntur arose in e; in the o branch this was improved to delectantur ac pascuntur, in the e E J branch to delectantur et pascuntur, both these readings being perfectly normal. Now, if the 0 copyist encountered either of these two readings, he would have had no reason at all for changing the text; if he encountered the error delectantur pascuntur, he would probably have conjectured delectantur et (or ac) pascuntur (as did the other scribes) and never have thought of delectanter pascuntur. Thus, the correct reading delectanter pascuntur may have been introduced into a lost 0 ancestor from a source outside the e group. However, there is also the possibility that E had the correct reading, which was handed down from e to 0. In that case, the error delectantur pascuntur arose twice independently, viz. in a lost ancestor of o and in a lost ancestor of e E J, which is possible since the abbreviation for delectanter can be almost identical with the abbreviation for delectantur (which appears from some of the other MSS). If the 0 text is contaminated, this could explain why 0 has very few errors of its own (above)16 and why it has been troublesome in the stemmata of Rev. I and Rev. VII to establish the precise relations between 0 and the other MSS close to it. Yet, since the contamination cannot be fully proved, I have not marked it in the stemma. Under all circumstances, it should be borne in mind that the relations within the group are open to doubt.17 6.7. The relations within the 0 group The 0 group is defined by the fact that the MSS contain the Celeste Viridarium text (see section 6.2) and the group consists of three MSS, viz. Ad Bd . The relations between them are as follows. There are two manifest errors common to Ad Bd , indicating that these MSS belong together: A 73 solebat Ad Bd instead of silebat; A 78 morti om. Ad Bd. It is evident that Ad is not an ancestor of Bd, since Ad has errors of its own, e.g. A 74 om. Ad; A 77 triumphali honore om. 15 There are errors specific to e also in the SA stemma, but, since the E J MSS are not in the SA stemma, no conclusions can be drawn from a comparison. 16 Bergh, Rev. VII, pp. 45 f., pointed out the low frequency of errors specific to 0 in the Rev. VII stemma. 17 There are alternative solutions. One could let o and 0 change positions in the stemma, assuming that the o text is contaminated (the OeEJ errors were then removed in the o text, owing to contamination). In this case, the two passages from Å 95 and Å 100 cause no trouble: the correct readings were in e and were handed down to 0, whereas the errors arose in the o e E J ancestor. 
 
 
 
 
 6.7 THE RELATIONS WITHIN THE 0 GROUP 35 Ad; A 80 in tuo dorso Ad instead of tuo dorso (tuo dorso om. H). The Bd MS has only two errors of its own and they are not so serious as to rule out the possibility that Bd was an ancestor of Ad, since they could have been corrected by means of conjecture; A 70 pudedri Bd instead of putridi; Å 80 pro quod Bd instead of pro eo quod. There is also the following Bd error, in which passage the o MS (of the Revelations Tradition) has another error: A 67 ex Bd instead of et (a o). Since Bd is probably older (1392) than Ad (15th century), the possibility cannot be excluded that Bd is an ancestor of Ad, but, since there is no reliable positive evidence, they have been taken as twin MSS in the stemma. The question could, of course, be solved definitely by a check of other texts in the Ad Bd MSS than the Q0, but this does not appear necessary, since it is obvious that, under all circumstances, Bd, not Ad, should be used in establishing the text, since Bd is also more reliable. The La MS cannot be subordinate to the Ad Bd ancestor, owing to the Ad Bd errors. Nor can h' be an ancestor of the Ad Bd group. First of all, I,' is probably younger (15th century) than Bd (1392) and, secondly, there are errors specific to e.g. A 77 ideo La instead of idcirco; A 78 suam om. L"; A 80 indesinenter La instead of incessanter. Thus, L" and the Ad Bd ancestor are both derived from 0, as shown in the stemma diagram. 
 
 
 
 
 7. The manuscripts of the Old Swedish A text Four MSS which contain the Old Swedish (=A) text are known, viz. Stockholm, Royal Library A 29 (= OSB), ibidem A 27 (= OSF), ibidem A 36 (= OSG) and Stockholm, Riksarkivet, Skokloster 8 (= OSH).18 The QO texts of the MSS OSF, OSG and OSH have been edited elsewhere (see section 2.2). In view of the importance of the Old Swedish text, I have included in the present book an edition of the fourth MS, OSB (pp. 93 ff.), which appears to be very important. Whenever I quote the Old Swedish text in this edition, I give the reading of the OSB MS, but, in such passages, I have checked that there are no important differences in the OSF, OSG or OSH MSS (when there are such differences, this has been mentioned). 18 In order that the signs B F G H should not be mistaken for the same signs referring to Latin MSS containing Bridgettine texts (B = Berlin, MS theol. lat. fol. 33 etc., see the list of Latin MSS), I have added the abbreviation OS to the signs referring to the Old Swedish MSS: OSB OSF OSG OSH (cf. Eklund, Regula Salvatoris, pp. 16 f.). 
 
 
 
 
 8. The establishment of the texts and textual criticism As far as the E text is concerned, the editorial work is simple, since only §§ 42-50 have survived in the Ob fragment (Chapter 5). The A text offers more problems, which will be discussed in the following sections 8.1-8.7. Thus, these sections deal only with the A text, not with the E.' text. The A text has been edited from one of the Old Swedish MSS, viz. OSB; the three other Old Swedish MSS have already been edited elsewhere (section 2.2). Yet, § 14 has been omitted in the OSB MS and has been printed from the OSG MS instead. 8.1. Choice of manuscripts The main principles for the choice of MSS were mentioned at the end of section 6.3. The left-hand branch, i.e. the lost g MS, is reconstructed from a suitable selection of g MSS, in which process the Y A" o J Ab Za MSS have been chosen. It should be borne in mind that fl (as reconstructed from Y A' o J Ab) has a somewhat higher value than its twin MS Za (since Za may, after all, be a h MS; see section 6.4). The right-hand stemma branch, i.e. h, is reconstructed from Nb K. Whenever g and b disagree, there is no help from the stemma diagram. All such passages have been listed in section 6.5 above. In some of them, there are positive indications that the g reading is correct and it has, accordingly, been printed. In other passages, in which there are no such indications, the g reading has likewise been printed (cf. the explanation of this in section 6.5). The W Ee 0 p L° Gh MSS cannot contribute to the establishment of the text, since their locations are open to doubt. Nevertheless, the readings of La and Bd have been described in the apparatus in order to enable the reader to see the Celeste Viridarium text. The text of the editio princeps Gh has likewise been described and it appears that Gh has a good text with few errors. 8.2. Cursus In the Bridgettine texts edited so far, there has been very little intention on the part of the authors to create cursus. As regards the SA, I have shown that there is, indeed, some intention, but the degree of intention is so small that it is useless for textual criticism (Eklund, Cursus). In the A version of the QO text, however, 4 - Sten Eklund 
 
 
 
 
 38 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM there is a very high degree of intention and the A text is, unlike the other recently edited, Bridgettine texts, thoroughly rhythmicized.'9 In Table 1, I have listed 29 types of cadences;2° the list has been copied from T. Janson's book on cursus and his 29 designations of the patterns (6p, 6pp, etc.) are printed in the first column. This enables direct comparisons to be made with all the authors discussed in Janson's book. For those readers who are not familiar with Type of cadence No. 1 6p 6pp 1 5p 2 p 5p 3 pp 5p 4 1 5pp 5 6 p 5pp pp 5PP 7 1 4p 8 p 4p 9 pp 4p 10 1 4pp 11 p 4pp 12 pp 4pp 13 pp 1 3p 14 other 1 3p 15 p 3p 16 17 pp 3p p 1 3pp 18 other 1 3pp 19 p 3pp 20 pp 3pp 21 pp 1 1 2 22 p 1 2 23 other 1 2 24 pp 2 2 25 other p 2 26 27 pp 2 28 1 1 0 0 4 2 0 3 0 0 18 51 0 2 1 0 0 19 2 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 3 2 2 0 - - - - trispondaic. _ _ velox other _ _ _ tardus _ planus - other ' - other L _ _ other 0.8 0.0 0.0 3.5 1.7 0.0 2.6 0.0 0.0 15.7 44.7 0.0 1.7 0.8 0.0 0.0 16.6 1.7 0.8 0.0 0.8 0.8 0.0 0.8 0.0 2.6 1.7 1.7 0.0 Table 1 '9 It is possible that also the E text was rhythmicized, but it is härd to tell since only a fragment has survived. This fragment contains eight sentence endings; four of these form a trispondaicus and three of them form a velox, whereas only one shows no cursus at all. 20 The first two types of cadences, i.e. 6p and 6pp, have been numbered 1. I have done so, because in my paper on cursus no distinction was made between these two types and, by assigning no. 1 to both of them, the numbering of the other types agrees with the numbering in the paper on cursus. 
 
 
 
 
 8.3 NORMALIZATIONS 39 Janson's system of notation, I have marked the sequence of stressed and un- stressed syllables for each type of cadence. I have also marked the pure forms of trispondaicus, velox, tardus and planus (patterns 9, 10, 12 and 16). From the A text, I have considered only sentences ending with full stops, question marks and exclamation marks, whereas endings of individual clauses within the sentences have been left aside.21 Prepositions have been regarded as proclitic words. Now, the A reviser appears to have been very fond of the pure forms of trispondaicus (pattern 9), velox (pattern 10) and planus (pattern 16), whereas the other patterns appear in very low numbers. He obviously had a very strong intention to create these three patterns, a conclusion which may be confirmed both by an internal comparison including a chi-square test, as described by Janson (pp. 19 ff.)22 and by an external comparison, i.e. a comparison with average unrhythmi- cal texts. In such unrhythmical texts, the total of patterns 9, 10 and 16 amounts to about 24% of the total of the sentences (see Eklund, Cursus, Table 1, the Average column: 7.4 + 3.9 + 12.6 = 23.9%). In the 00 text, however, these three patterns together appear in 77% of the sentences (15.7 + 44.7 + 16.6). Thus, the author's desire to create patterns 9, 10 and 16 has increased their frequency from about 24% to 77%. This is a considerable increase and the reviser obviously had a very strong intention to create cursus. His desire for cursus was so strong that the cursus concept may occasionally be used as an argument in textual criticism, although this method is generally not advisable (Eklund, Cursus, p. 52). 8.3. Normalizations The name of St Birgitta has been normalized to Birgitta. Other names (of persons and places) appear in one and the same form throughout the text, viz. the form which has the best support in the MSS. Variations in the MSS used to establish the text have been completely accounted for (even minor details), as regards the name of St. Birgitta and as regards other names. A consistent numbering of the prayers appears only in the Gh edition (Oracio prima diuinitus reuelata, oracio secunda, oracio tercia, oracio quarta). A few other MSS sporadically (i.e. at the beginning of one, two or three of the prayers only) have similar headings, such as oracio, oracio bona, oracio bona et deuota (no 21 However, I carried out a similar investigation concerning the individual clauses, and the frequency of the different patterns turned out to be about the same in the individual clauses as it is in the sentence endings. 22 The chi-square test reveals that the reviser favoured patterns 10 (velox) and 16 (planus). As regards pattern 9 (trispondaicus), the internal comparison does not give any indication, which is due to a shortcoming of this method called the "neighbour effect" (Janson, pp. 26-28; cf. Eklund, Cursus, p. 37). As regards pattern 9 (trispondaicus), one has to rely entirely on the external comparison. 
 
 
 
 
 40 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM numbering). It is very dubious whether the archetype A had any numbering and, if so, what it looked like. However, since the prayers are often referred to by their numbers, I have incorporated the numbering Oracio I, Oracio II, Oracio III and Oracio IV after the headings of each prayer respectively. 8.4. Orthography The MSS used to establish the A text present very much the same orthographic variations as the MSS used in the previous editions of the Birgitta corpus and I refer to them for examples (section 2.3, Bergh, Eklund, Undhagen). In the present edition, the standards of the previous editions have mainly been adopted. The ancient classical spelling (Georges) forms the basis, but deviations from it have been accepted when they are frequent in the MSS. Some of these deviations have been entered in all the words in which they appear, throughout the text (just as in the previous editions): e is used for ae and oe, ci is used for ti before vowels (not when ti is preceded by t or s), v is used initially and u otherwise for both the consonant and the vowel. Other deviations have been accepted in words in which they have very strong support from the MSS. When a deviation from the classical spelling of a word (i.e. a spelling which is not in Georges or is listed only as a variant in Georges) gives the impression of being frequent in the MSS, the frequency has been examined in this way. All occurrences of the word have been checked in those e MSS on which the text is based. When a deviation is present in more than 60% of all the instances thus gathered, it has been adopted in the printed text. This applies to columpna, condempno, dyabolus, dyadema, exilium, expectare, exultacio, habundancia, hiis, illico, nichilominus, obprobria, perhennis, pulcer, sompnum, which spellings are all in the majority of the MSS. Orthographic details of this kind have not been listed in the apparatus. On some occasions, however, the spelling of a word is so interesting that it deserves to be mentioned. In A 92, for example, there is the word anhelitum and some of the MSS (Y A' Za, which are mentioned in the apparatus, and beside them also 0 e p) have hanelitum. The fact that so many MSS have this spelling indicates that it might not just be a simple error, which is confirmed by the GMLS (s.v. anhelo).23 23 For the sake of consistency, the principles of orthography have been adopted also in the Prohemium (3. 1-5), although this piece of text is present in one source only, i.e. in the editio princeps (Gh). 
 
 
 
 
 41 8.5. THE ORDER OF THE PRAYERS 8.5. The order of the prayers According to the testimony of the MSS, the four prayers were arranged in two different ways in the archetypes of the versions, as shown in this survey. The E and A texts The A text Christ's suffering and death E A 2-24 Christ's body E A 25-45 ;St. Mary A 6-32 (Oracio prima) } Christ's suffering and death A 33-62 (Oracio secunda) St. Mary E A 46-68 Christ's body A 63-83 (Oracio tercia) St. Mary's body E'. A 69-87 St. Mary's body A 84-103 (Oracio quarta) 1 As regards the E text, there is only the short Ob fragment extant, but, since this fragment contains the end of the prayer concerning Christ's body (! 42-45), immediately followed by the beginning of the prayer concerning St. Mary (E 46- 50), and since its text is so very closely related to the Old Swedish A text (see Chapter 4 above), it seems obvious that the E archetype had the order of the A text. It was emphasized above (Chapter 4) that the E and A texts represent an earlier stage of the QO than does the A text — as a matter of fact, the ! text constitutes the source from which the A text was worked out by some skilled reviser. Under these circumstances, it is most likely that E A reflect the order of the original and that St. Birgitta herself arranged the prayers in that order, whereas the order of the A version was established by the A reviser (the arrows in the survey represent his act of rearranging). Concerning the Å archetype, the A MSS clearly indicate that the prayers were arranged in the order shown above. However, the numbering of the prayers (Oracio prima, Oracio secunda etc.) is in none of the A MSS but only in the editio princeps, Gh (see section 8.3). So far we have spoken of the order in the E A A archetypes, as they can be reconstructed from the extant MSS. However, there are deviations in individual MSS as well. Two of the A MSS, viz. Nb and Ha, have the order of the E A texts. The change from the normal A order may have been made once in an ancestor common to Nb Ha or, maybe, twice independently (section 6.5). The scribe(s) responsible for it probably knew of the existence of the 'E A order but they could perhaps also have made the change independently on account of the contents, since the E', A order is, after all, more logical than the A order. There is a small deviation also in one of the Old Swedish MSS. All of them have the E A order, which was, accordingly, in the archetype, but, in Skokloster 8 
 
 
 
 
 42 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM (=OSH), the last prayer (to St. Marys body) does not follow immediately after the prayer to St. Mary but is separated from it by some other prayers. 8.6. Ömissions of complete paragraphs In the A MSS, there are many omissions of complete paragraphs. The paragraphs vary considerably in length (the shortest one, i.e. A 88, amounts to 16 words, the longest one, i.e. A 52, amounts to 139 words; the average is 47 words). Further- more, the beginnings of the paragraphs are very stereotyped. Under these circum- stances, it is easy to overlook the shortest paragraphs and, as a matter of fact, the omissions fall precisely in such short paragraphs (the omitted paragraphs contain from 17 up to 25 words). Take, for example, A 38, which has been omitted in the Ha o Ee MSS. The surrounding paragraphs 37, 39 and 40 are all very short and they all, as well as A 38, begin with the words Benedictus sis tu . . . 24 I give here a complete list of omissions and transpositions of paragraphs, some of which have to be discussed. A 37 om. e E J post A 38 trsp. d (in marg. corr. d) A 38 om. Ha 0 Ee A 45 om. Ha e E J A 56 om. Ha A 57 om. Aar3 in marg. d Nb bis Lf3 A 72 post A 73 trsp. L Ad Bd A 74 om. Ad First of all, the distribution among the MSS shows that these paragraphs were certainly in A. Concerning some of them, there are no problems whatsoever. Paragraph 37 was omitted in the e E J ancestor (see the stemma on p. 18) and the d transposition is independent of this omission. Paragraphs 56 and 74 cause no trouble, since they are omitted in one single MS each and § 72 was transposed in 0. Paragraph 38 was probably omitted independently on three occasions, viz. in Ha (the W MS has very many errors, see below), o and Ee. Similarly, the errors must be independent as regards § 57. Paragraph 45 is the most interesting case. To all appearances, there are simply two independent omissions of this paragraph, viz. one in Ila and another in the e E J ancestor. However, in the Nb MS, the copyist, having written § 44, continues with the first words of § 46; he realizes his mistake, crosses these words out and continues with §§ 45 and 46 in the correct order. Now, this mistake of the Nb copyist may be completely independent of the That such mistakes were easily committed is evident also from the fact that they appear every now and then in the current text but have been corrected by the original scribe. See, for example, the apparatus of Å 15 (the o MS), A 24 (the N" MS), A 25 (the K MS), etc. 24 
 
 
 
 
 8.7. PASSAGES DISCUSSED 43 omission of § 45 in Ha, but there may also be a connection. In section 6.5, I pointed out that Ha Nb may perhaps have had an ancestor in common. Under such circumstances, it would be possible to ,assume that § 45 was in the margin of such an Ha Nb ancestor; the W copyist, who was indeed very careless, missed it and the Nb copyist did not notice the entry at first and began writing § 46 after § 44 but then recognized the entry of § 45 and corrected himself. As can be seen from the list, no less than three short paragraphs are omitted in the Ha MS. This would be somewhat peculiar unless W was a very bad MS. However, Ha has more errors of its own than any of the other MSS and, under these circumstances, it is not astonishing that three paragraphs are missing in it. 8.7. Passages discussed In this section have been gathered those passages, in which the establishment of the correct A text requires some discussion (the E and A texts, of course, do not offer any such problems).25 The Greek letters in the accounts below refer to all the extant MSS subordinate to the lost MS designated by the Greek letter (see the stemma diagram on p. 18), not only the MSS used for the establishment of the text, which means that the account is complete. 6 in ista oracione (oracione sequenti LE3 Nb) a Deo reuelata beate Birgitte . . . laudatur . . . Virgo Maria Ha Ee p Lr3 Gh ö des. Za 0 hec oracio (sequens oracio B oracio siue meditacio subscripta E J) fuit a Deo reuelata beate Birgitte (Birgitte sepedicte B virginis post Birgitte add. et del. d) in qua... laudatur . . . Virgo Maria P. In this case, there is no reliable indication from the syntax or the content whether the structure hec oracio . . . in qua . . . or the structure in ista oracione . . . was in the original. There are three more similar headings in the text and in one of them (A 33 = the heading of Or. II), there is the structure hec oracio... in qua . . .; in the two others (A 63 = the heading of Or. III and A 84 = the heading of Or. IV), there is the structure in haclista oracione . . This passage was adduced in the discussions concerning the group above (section 6.4) and either there is an error, which arose in p (if in ista oracione... is correct), or there is an error common to Ha Ee p LY Gh ö (if hec oracio... in qua . . . is correct), meaning that these MSS (except H") form a group. I have chosen the former alternative, admitting that the latter is also possible. A couple of very trifling discrepancies, in which neither the distribution among the MSS nor the arguments from the syntax or the contents give any guidance, have just been left aside, viz. A 28 leuissimallenissima and 62 membris tuis/tuis membris (for this passage, cf. A 79, 85, 95). 25 
 
 
 
 
 44 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM 10 Laus sit tibi (sit tibi 02 [exc. B] W Gh tibi sit Y P Aa13 B Ee p Lf3 K ex sit tibi in tibi sit corr. Nb tibi om. A" des. Za 0), domina mea virgo Maria . . . In this case, the distribution among the MSS does not give any reliable indication as to whether A had sit tibi or tibi sit. There is a similar passage from A 19 which is also more or less open to doubt: A 19 Laus sit tibi (sit tibi P A" o e H Ab m Ha Ee Gh tibi sit Y Aar3 EJBdpgb ex tibi sit in sit tibi corr. 0 des. Za 0). There are several other similar passages in the text. In no less than 11 of them, all the MSS unanimously offer the reading sit tibi, viz. in A 11, 27, 36, 41, 47, 51, 53, 55, 60, 61, 103. In almost all of the remaining cases, the order sit tibi is likewise strongly supported by the MSS, although some of them deviate.26 Thus, the order sit tibi is very frequent in passages of the type discussed, whereas the reverse order, tibi sit, is extremely rare. As a matter of fact, there is no passage at all in which that order has the support of all the MSS, and only one single passage in which the distribution among the MSS seems to favour it, viz. A 8 tibi sit A (exc. A' Aaf3 E Gh) sit tibi A' AaI3 E Gh. Thus, the A reviser almost exclusively used the order sit tibi. In Å 10, the order sit tibi also has the support of the E text: E 49 sit tibi. For these reasons, this order has been printed in Å 10 and 19 and, of course, in all the other passages, except A 8. Yet A 10, 19 and 8 remain open to doubt. 14 Quem (sc. Christum) . . . tuis preciosis (preciosis Ha Ee p LE3 Gh b preciosissimis p [exc. d] ex preciosis in preciosissimis corr. d des. Za 0) manibus in templo presentasti . . . The question here is whether the A reviser wrote the positive preciosis or the superlative preciosissimis. The word appears on no less than 13 other occasions in the A text (42 bis, 52, 56, 58, 64, 70, 75, 80, 85, 94, 96, 98) and in all these passages it is in the positive; there is no instance of the superlative. This points to the reading preciosis having been in the original of the A text and this indication is further supported by the fact that the reviser is comparatively consistent in his use of the positive and the superlative. Picking out those passages in the text in which an adjective, used as an attribute or as a complement with forms of esse, denotes some kind of value and in which it would be possible to use the positive as weil as the superlative, we arrive at this distribution (only adjectives which appear on more than four occasions each have been taken into account; occurrences in the Å 14 sit tibi Å (exc. 0 B Ab m) tibi sit B m ex tibi sit in sit tibi corr. 0 ex tibi sunt in tibi sit corr. AM ; Å 18 sit tibi Å (exc. B) tibi sit B; Å 35 sit tibi Å (exc. B Ee) tibi sit B Ee; Å 43 sit tibi A (exc. E) tibi sit E; Å 44 sit tibi A (exc. An tibi om. Aa«; Å 48 sit tibi Å (exc. E J B) tibi sit J sit om. E B; Å 50 sit tibi Å (exc. E) tibi sit E; A 52 sint tibi A (exc. Aa° Za Ee) sit tibi E' ex sint tibi in sit tibi corr. Za fuit (fiut ?) sint ibi Aat3; Å 54 sit tibi A (exc. Aal tibi om. et in marg. suppl. Aaa; Å 59 sit tibi Å (exc. Aaa o) tibi sit o tibi om. et post sit supra lin. suppl. Aaa. 26 
 
 
 
 
 45 8.7. PASSAGES DISCUSSED Prohemium, §§ 1-5, and in the headings, §§ 6, 33, 63 and 84, have been left aside): benedictus gloriosus preciosus verus virtuosus honestus beatus dignus magnus sacer sanctus No. of instances in the positive No. of instances in the superlative 61 16 13 6 4 0 2 127 4 3 528 0 0 0 0 0 5 5 9 3 8 7 The reviser is absolutely consistent in using only the positive forms of benedictus, gloriosus, preciosus, verus, virtuosus and the superlative form of honestus, whereas he uses both the positive and the superlative of beatus, dignus, magnus, sacer and sanctus. There may have been a phonetic reason for avoiding the superlatives benedictissimus, gloriosissimus and preciosissimus. Each of them contains six syllables and there seems to be a tendency to avoid such long superlatives on the part of the Å reviser. The superlatives which he uses in his text have an average length of 4.6 syllables, whereas those superlatives which he never uses (i.e. the superlatives of adjectives, which appear in the positive in the text but never in the superlative, although they could equally well have been in the superlative as far as the content is concerned) have an average length of 5.8 syllables. Furthermore, the accumulation of i's in benedictissimus, gloriosissimus and preciosissimus may also have contributed to the dislike of these superlatives. Since preciosus is one of those adjectives whose superlativs are avoided, it is more likely that the reviser wrote preciosus in Å 14 than that he wrote preciosissi- mis, although there is no absolute proof.29 This passage was used in establishing the fl group of the stemma (section 6.4 above). The phrase dignum est, quodlvt (A 31 and 77) is not included in the figure. The expression Spiritus Sanctus not included in the figure. 29 In the Birgitta corpus (section 2.3) there is a preference for the positive preciosus, but the superlative preciosissimus is also used. I have noted 83 instances of the positive and 22 instances of the superlative. 27 28 
 
 
 
 
 46 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM 16 . . . apostolos . . ., qui eius exernplis, miraculis et doctrinis illuminati veritatis testes effecti sunt Ihesum tuum et Dei Filium veraciter existere diuulgando (diuul- gando A [exc. e Gh] diuulgantes Gh asserentes diuulgando e des. Za 0) cunctis gentibus, quod ipse erat, qui prophetarum scripturas per seipsum adimpleuerat . . . All the A MSS, except the e MSS o 0 e E J and Gh, have diuulgando, a reading which was certainly in A. In the o 0 e E J ancestor (e) the word asserentes was added before diuulgando and in Gh diuulgando was changed to diuulgantes. The problem here is whether the A reading diuulgando could be retained or whether it constitutes an error in the archetype. The gerund diuulgando seems to govern both the preceding accusative with the infinitive Ihesum . . . esse and the following clause quod ipse erat qui . . "... the apostles, who, enlightened by his examples, by his miracles and by his teaching, became witnesses of the truth, asserting to all mankind (diuulgando cunctis gentibus) that Christ was really your (= St. Mary's) and God's son3° and that he was the one, who in his person had fulfilled the prophecies .". existere and quod ipse erat Such an asyndetic coordination as that of Ihesum . . . cannot be vindicated in this text. It was probably for that reason that the e copyist inserted asserentes before diuulgando, thus making asserentes govern Ihe- sum... existere and making diuulgando govern quod ipse erat... Now, there are three possibilities. One could try to vindicate the reading diuulgando in one way or another, accept the e conjecture asserentes diuulgando or find some other conjecture. It seems somewhat odd that the reading diuulgando should have escaped all the scribes, with the exception of the e scribe, without being changed, if it was actually an error. After all, most of the scribes were highly skilled and, as a matter of fact, the lack of obvious errors common to more than just a few MSS indicates that such obvious errors were normally corrected in the copying process. It is especially interesting that the Ghotan editors changed diuulgando to diuulgantes, probably a deliberate change made in order to produce a more classical Latin.31 It would be curious if the editors made this small change but retained the construction of the sentence, if it was actually erroneous and dubious. For that reason, I have printed the reading diuulgando and intend to explain it in the following way.32 The genitive veritatis is to be interpreted not as an 3° Lunekn (4, p. 86) took existere to be a verb of full meaning: ". . förkunnade att Jesus, din och Guds son, i sanning fanns till och att det var han, som . .". However, the Old Swedish text clearly indicates that existere is intended as a copula: OSB 55 . . . ath han var gudhz son . . . 31 There are other such corrections in Gh, for example, A 10, a passage in which all the MSS offer the reading moderasti, whereas Gh has the "more correct" form moderabaris. 32 One could think of interpreting the quod-clause as causal: ". . the apostles, who . . . became witnesses of the truth asserting to all mankind that Christ was really your and God's son, because he was the one, who . .". This solution has been rejected mainly because there are 46 causal clauses in the Å text, none of which is introduced by quod (42 begin with quia and four with [pro] eo quod; quod in Å 
 
 
 
 
 8.7. PASSAGES DISCUSSED 47 objective genitive ("witnesses of the truth") but just as describing the witnesses, "truth-witnesses". The expression veritatis restes effecti sunt governs Ihesum . . . existere and diuulgando governs quod ipse erat . . .: "the apostles, who . . . became truth-witnesses that Christ was really your and God's son when asserting to all mankind that he was the one, who . .". 23 Gaude . . . domina . . que, . . . celi... introitu patefacto (introitum patefactum Ee) per filium (per filium p. [exc. 0 e E J] Ha Ee p K filium OeEJUGhNb) tuum, resurgentem et corona (et corona bis E et corone o et om. A' Aar3 coronam Aar3) victorie (victorie post vidisti loc. Aat3) triumphantem vidisti et (vidisti et g [exc. Ha Ee p Lf3 Gh vidisti victorie et Aat3 ipsum Kl [vidisti ante ipsum supra lin. suppl. K2] vidisti om. Nb)33 quadragesimo die post resurreccionem . . . ad suum regnum... ascendere conspexisti (deest 0). Apart from the minor deviations in the A", Aa[3 , o, E and Ee MSS, which cannot have been in A, there are two main issues: did A have per filium or filium and did A have vidisti et or something else? The distribution clearly indicates that the left- hand branch, i.e. the g MSS, had per filium and vidisti et. Since one of the two right-hand branch MSS, i.e. K, also has per filium, this reading was probably in A. As regards vidisti et, nothing can be said for sure, since vidisti is missing both in Nb and in K1 . However, Nb still has the word et (the et after the missing vidisti), which suggests that an ancestor may have had vidisti et. Thus, the A archetype is most likely to have had Gaude . . . domina, que... celi . . .introitu patefacto per filium tuum resurgentem et corona victorie triumphantem vidisti et quadragesimo die post resurreccionem . . . ad suum regnum . . . ascendere conspexisti. This text could be defended, although it is not a very good one (there should have been an eum after resurgentem to make the syntax more clear): "Rejoice thou, my Lady, who, when Your Son had opened the entrance to heaven, saw Him rise and triumph with the crown of victory and likewise saw him ascend to His kingdom on the 40th day after His resurrection". This version was handed down to Ft (and is present in almost all the p MSS). However, some of the scribes apparently disapproved of this text and changed it. In some MSS, the preposition per was removed (Gh LI3 N" and the ancestor of 0 e E J; the removal may have taken place independently or contamination may be involved) and in one of them, K, vidisti et has been changed to ipsum. Both these corrections produce a much better text (in K, however, the K2 corrector spoiled the improvement by inserting vidisti again above the line). 99 is probably a relative pronoun), whereas quod normally introduces clauses equal to the accusative with the infinitive construction. 33 The alteration in K is complicated. The K2 scribe added vidisti above the line and, at the same time, he made the word ipsum clearer by filling the letters in and he also changed the first letter from a majuscule / to a minuscule i. 
 
 
 
 
 48 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM The question is whether the Å text could be vindicated or whether some change must be made. From the point of view of the contents, the reading of the archetype and the conjecture of Gh L13 NI' 0 e E J (the removal of per) both imply that St. Mary actually saw Christ on his resurrection; with the conjecture of K (ipsum instead of et vidisti), this is not implied. According to the Bible, St. Mary was not the first person to see Christ after his resurrection; as a matter of fact, it was Mary Magdalene. Although this fact seems to be compatible only with the K conjecture (ipsum instead of vidisti et), it is in reality not an obstacle. It is a recurrent problem in the Revelations (see, for example, the preceding paragraph, A 22) that St. Mary is said to have been the first person to see Christ after his resurrection and the explanation is given in Rev. VI 94 A and SA 19:8-9 (cf. also A 22), where St. Mary clearly states that Christ visited her first of all but that this fact was concealed on account of her great humility. Thus, from the point of view of the contents, neither the reading of the archetype nor the two conjectures can be rejected. Syntactical considerations may be applied to the words per filium, which seem to express an agent. Now, there are a good many passages with agents in the A text and they all contain the preposition ab (for example, A 8 bis, 21, 46, 59, 67, 68, 70, 72, etc.). The preposition per occurs in 14 instances in the A text (A 10, 16, 22, 25, 27 bis, 29, 39, 83 bis, 94 bis, 103 bis) and normally it is combined with an active form and expresses means (for example, A 94 voluntatem, quam per prophetas predixerat, per te in munlo voluit adimplere); only once is there a passive form, but per still does not express an agent but a means: A 29 donec (corpus tuum) per Dei potenciam denuo anime tue . . . extitit copulatum. Thus, the Å reviser consistently used ab, never per, to express the agent, which seems to tell against per in the passage from A 23. However, it is possible that A 23 per filium should be regarded not as an agent but as an expression of a means. In many of the passages in the A text, the means denoted by per is not a thing but a person: A 27 per angelum, A 27 per suos apostolos, A 39 per te ipsum, A 94 per prophetas . . . per te. On one occasion, per is used in this way of Christ: Å 16 ipse erat (Christus), qui prophe- tarum scripturas per seipsum adimpleuerat. It is possible that per filium tuum is used in this sense in A 23 and does not mean "by your son" but "by means of your son". For this reason, one cannot just reject the reading per filium tuum. I have printed the reading of the archetype A but have done so with great hesitation. 27 Sit tibi, o domina mea Virgo Maria (o domina mea Virgo Maria p Ha p L[31 Gh domina mea o Virgo Maria b domina mea Virgo Maria za E' deest 0), eternus honor . . . In this case, the choice is between three readings, viz. o domina mea Virgo Maria, domina mea Virgo Maria and domina mea o Virgo Maria. The last of these possibilities may be excluded by means of a comparison with other passages. The interjection o appears on 25 occasions in the text and is always located at the very 
 
 
 
 
 8.7. PASSAGES DISCUSSED 49 beginning of the vocative(s), never between two vocatives. The expression o domina mea Virgo Maria is especially frequent in its pure form (Å 14, 28, 32, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91, 93, 98) but appears also with further additions, e.g. A 99 0 domina mea, leticia cordis mei, Virgo Maria. Thus, the reading domina mea o Virgo Maria is erroneous and constitutes an error common to the K Nb MSS. Although the Nb MS has exactly the same error in A 14, it is not likely that it was committed twice independently in K and Nb here in A 27 and, accordingly, this passage is one of those which were used to establish the ö group (section 6.5). It is harder to choose between the two remaining alternatives, since the distribu- tion among the MSS gives no guidance and since the expression domina mea Virgo Maria (without the interjection o) is also frequent in the text (Å 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc.). The interjection has been printed, but it is quite possible that it was never in A. There is a similar ambiguity as regards the interjection o in Å 32 (see section 6.5 above). 42 . . . ipsorum (discipulorum) pedes lauando tuis sandis manibus preciosis maxi- mam humilitatem (humilitatem pt Ha Ee p 1,(3 Gh caritatem b deest 0) tuam humiliter ostendisti. In this case, there is no help from the stemma codicum. Both words occur elsewhere in the text, caritas frequently (for example Å 24 and 26) and humilitas on one occasion (A 82, in the same context as here in A 42). One could argue that the reading humilitatem is far too pleonastic with regard to the following humiliter and an error caused by influence from humiliter. On the other hand, the A reviser was by no means afraid of pleonasms (see Chapter 14, Grammatical index, under the headings "Syntactical structures, Pleonasms"), so he could perhaps have allowed even this bold one in his text. If so, it is understandable that some copyist should have improved the text in an ancestor of N" K by substituting caritatem for humilitatem; in doing this, he may have been influenced in some way by the preceding caritatiue or by caritatem in the following paragraph. The reading humilitatem has some support in the Old Swedish text, in which there is no mention of love but only of humility: OSB 9 Oc thcer cefter there foter mz Othmiykt twadhe. In the Birgitta corpus (section 2.3), the washing of feet is mentioned every now and then as a sign of humility (for example, Rev. IV 9 C, IV 72 A, IV 91 and VI 10 C), but I have not found it in connection with the word caritas. The same goes for the Old Swedish texts, but, as a matter of fact, in those texts I have found one passage in which both humility and love are mentioned (the second of the following two examples): SvB 19,20 (p. 53) for the största ödhmiuktena mädh hwilke thu thwadhe . . . thinna apostla . . . föthir; SvB 18,13 (p. 41) twadhe thinna känneswena föther mädh största kärlekx ödhmywkt. The reading humilitatem has been printed, but caritatem is certainly not an impossible alternative. 
 
 
 
 
 50 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM 43 Honor sit tibi, Domine mi (Domine mi A" Aa13 d Ha Ee L13 b mi Domine Y P E H B Ab m Za p Gh deest 0) Ihesu Christe . . . The phrase Domine mi (almost always followed by the words Ihesu Christe) occurs on no less than 49 occasions in the 00. In 41 of these, the MSS clearly indicate that the archetype had the word order Domine mi (either the MSS unanimously offer this order or there are deviations in insignificant MSS only). In the eight remaining cases, however, the MSS do not clearly indicate whether the archetype had Domine mi or mi Domine: A 43, 44, 50, 51, 52, 53, 60, (61). There is one single passage with mi at the beginning of the expression: A 62 mi Domine (mi Domine [exc. Ab m Ha] Domine mi Ab m Ha) Ihesu Christe (cf. also A 52 mi dulcissime Domine) and this means that both word orders are possible in the text. In the eight dubious passages, I have printed Domine mi but admit that there may have been mi Domine in some of them.34 46 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui . . . missus ad Herodem fuisti et te ab eo deridi (deridi p [exc. Aaa A' B d] Ee p K l derideri A" Aaf3 B d L0 Ha (de- supra lin. Ha) Gh K2 ex deridi in derideri corr. N" des. o 0) et contempni permisisti It would certainly be reasonable to reject the reading deridi as erroneous and due to the omission of an abbreviation stroke for -er-. However, it seems curious that so many scribes should have committed or accepted such an error in this particular passage — as a matter of fact, the reading deridi has much better support in the MSS than the reading derideri. Since scholars dealing with the Romance languages assume the existence of a third conjugation form ridere (with a short -e- instead of the classical long -e-),35 we must consider the possibility that deridi is a passive infinitive according to the third conjugation. There are only a few reports of third- conjugation forms of ridere and its compounds (mediaeval Latin dictionaries seldom list words like this one, since they offer no problems from the point of view of meaning), but in the literature36 I have found some more or less reliable 34 The predominance of Domine mi over mi Domine seems to exist also in the Birgitta corpus (section 2.3). The computer has come up with 25 instances of the former order but only one instance of the latter (the passages from the 00 are, of course, excluded). 35 E. Gamillscheg, Etymologisches Wörterbuch der Französischen Sprache, Heidelberg 1969, p. 775; W. Meyer-Liibke, Romanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch, 3. Aufl., Heidelberg 1930-1935, no. 7302; A. Ernout & A. Meillet, Dictionnaire etymologique de la langue latine, Paris 1959, p. 573; W. v. Wartburg, Französisches etymologisches Wörterbuch, Bd. 10, Basle 1960-62, p. 399. 36 Forcellini, rideo, irrideo; TLL 7,2,413,41 ff.; F. Neue, Formenlehre der lateinischen Sprache 3, Das Verbum, Leipzig 1897, p. 271; A. Walde & J.B. Hofmann, Lateinisches etymologisches Wörterbuch 2, Heidelberg 1954 (repr.), p. 433.; A. Ernout & A. Meillet, see the preceding note; A. Blaise & H. Chirat, Dictionnaire Latin-Frarmis des auteurs chretiens, Strasbourg 1954, rido, derideo; A. Blaise, 
 
 
 
 
 8.7. PASSAGES DISCUSSED 51 instances.37 Under these circumstances, I have assumed — with some hesitation — that the reading deridi was in A and was changed to the normal form derideri on some occasions in the stemma (just as we can still see the changes in K and Nb). 54 . . . quando latroni ad te converso paradisi gloriam misericorditer promisisti (misericorditer promisisti t Ee p Li3 Gh promisisti N" misericorditer promisisti in ras. octo fere litterarum K2 misericorditer ante promisisti scripsit et del. Ha deest 0). In this case, it is likely that K1 had the same reading as Nb, i.e. promisisti without misericorditer (cf. other passages with N" errors and corrections in K listed in section 6.5 above). The stemma gives no guidance as to whether misericorditer was actually in A or not. The word appears once more in the text, viz. in A 56. The Old Swedish text runs: OSB 19 tha thu miskund mz rofuarenom giordhe (similar text in OSG and OSH; the passage is missing in OSF). The word miskund suggests that the A reviser, in producing his text, had some Latin word meaning `compassion' in the MS of the E text he used. For that reason, he is likely to have written misericorditer in the original of the A text and, later on, this word dropped out in an Nb K ancestor. 60 Honor sempiternus sit tibi, Domine mi lhesu Christe, qui die tercia a mortuis resurrexisti (resurrexisti Aa« e H Abe Lf3 Gh K resuscitasti Y P Hal [resuscitari voluisti Ah1 m Za [in ras. Za] Ee p te suscitasti Nb deest 0) et, quibus tibi Hat] Aa B d placuit, te viuentem manifestasti . . . The distribution of the readings in the MSS gives no guidance, but, from the point of view of the contents, the reading resuscitasti seems impossible, whereas resur- rexisti gives a good sense. The latter reading also has the support of the Old Swedish text: OSB 24 LOf hafue thw myn hcerra jhesus christus thcer opstodh a paska dagh lifuandis oc teedhis thcem thw vilde . . . Thus, the reading resurrexisti is likely to have been in the original of the A text and it has been printed. The erroneous resuscitasti may have arisen independently on more occasions than one or may even have been in the archetype (if the archetype is not identical with the original of the text) and have been corrected on several occasions in the stemma. Lexicon Latinitatis Medii Aevi (Corpus Christianorum, Continuatio Mediaevalis), Turnhout 1975, derido. 37 Diom. gramm. I 383 item "rident" procul dubio cuncti dictitant; apud veteres "ridunt" reperimus dictum, ut M. Brutus de patientia "inridunt horum lacrimas"; Vetus Latina psalm. 51,8 (Hil. in psalm 51,19) videbunt iusti et timebunt et rident (ridebunt T E) super eum et dicent; Ven. Fort. Mart. 3,132 se inridi (irridi S) conputat alter (cf. S. Blomgren, Studia Fortunatiana I, Diss. Uppsala 1933, p. 1413); Gloss. III 416,9 ridamus: gelasomen; Hadr. I epist. 64 (MGH Epist. III, p. 592) ab illis deridamur; Paul. Diac. carm. 12,3 (MGH, Poetae Latini aevi Carolini I p. 49) deridor. 
 
 
 
 
 52 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM 64 . . . quamuis ego bene scio, quod benedictum corpus tuum incessanter laudatur . . . sed quia ex debito tibi teneor reddere infinitas graciarum acciones, ideo ego, licet sim (ideo ego licet sim g [exc. p] E' 0 [exc. L"] p L13 Gh ideo licet sim h ideo licet ego sim La ex ideo licet ego sim in ideo ego licet sim corr. Ha ex ideo ego scilicet sim in ideo ego licet sim corr. p) persona insipiens . . ., desidero tamen . . . referre gracias . . . The question here is whether A had the word ego or not and the MSS do not give any guidance. There is the following similar passage: A 85 quamuis ego certa sum . . . tamen ego, licet indigna persona sim, . . . desidero... gracias... reddere. This could be taken as support for ego in A 64, but, on the other hand, there is also the possibility that ego was not in A but was inserted later on, owing to influence from the passage in A 85. The presence of ego in Å 64 remains open to doubt, but, in accordance with the principle declared in section 6.5, the p, reading, i.e. ego, has been printed. 66 . . . idcirco caput et capilli tui (Christi) benedicti sint et honorentur (honorentur p, Ad Bd [honerentur Bd ] ornentur W Ee [hornentur El La p 1,13 Gh b) gloriose dyademate imperiali . . . The verb ornare does not occur in any other passage in this text, whereas there are instances of honorare in contexts more or less similar to our passage: A 27, 72, 75, 80, 82, 91, 95, 96, 100.38 One could conclude that the reviser never used ornare and, accordingly, that honorentur is the correct variant, but this would be rash. The reading ornentur could equally weil be regarded as the lectio difficilior, which was changed to honorentur by some copyist who was aware of the Å reviser's current practice. As a matter of fact, there is a similar passage with the verb decorare in A 86 and one could argue that this fact points to ornentur being the correct reading: A 86 Idcirco, o domina mea Virgo Maria, laudetur caesaries tua cum capillis tuis dyademate glorie decorata, quia solis iubare clariores sunt. Howev- er, as far as I can see, the fact that the Old Swedish text offers the reading teris (OSB 27) is the decisive argument and, for this reason, the reading honorentur has been printed. The passage has been used in establishing the top of the stemma in section 6.3 above. 66 . . . omnia, que creata sunt, in eternum tue subiaceant et obediant potestati (tue subiaceant et obediant potestati N" Kl [imperio et ante potestati supra lin. suppl. K2] tuo subiaceant et obediant imperio et potestati g [wo ante imperio loc. 0] Ee Ad Bd tue subiaceant et obediant imperio et potestati Ha La p LP [subiacent Lf31 Gh). 38 In most of these passages, the verb ornare would be more or less out of place; in the passage from A 27, however, ornare would perhaps be suitable. 
 
 
 
 
 8.7. PASSAGES DISCUSSED 53 In this rather complicated passage, there are three main alternativel, viz. (a) tue subiaceant et obediant potestati, (b) tuo subiaceant et obediant imperio et potestati and (c) tue subiaceant et obediant imperio et potestati. There is no support for either of the readings from the Old Swedish text, which runs thus: OSB 27 alt thz skapat ter under thit vold skal beighias. The single word vold may indicate that the lost E text had one single expressinn (potestati) but, since the Å reviser was very fond of expanding single expressions by introducing doublets (see Eklund, A Reassess- ment, p. 12), the reading of the Old Swedish by no urean excludes the idea that A had imperio et potestati. However, alternative (a) is syntactically correct and is likely to have been in the original of the A text. Alternative (b) is also syntactically correct but has the following drawback, as compared with alternative (a). The Å reviser was extremely fond of cursus (see section 8.2 above). The reading obediant potestati forms a pure velox (pattern 10 in Table 1, section 8.2), whereas imperio et potestati forms no cursus at all (pattern 8 in Table 1).39 In a paper (Eklund, Cursus), I have developed a method of calculating the probability of either of two readings having been in the original in cases like the present one. Pattern 10, velox, appears in 51 sentence endings in the Q0 (section 8.2, Table 1), whereas pattern 8 is in no sentence ending at all. This yields an estimated probability of 18 (18 + 0) = 1 for the former alternative. Whenever an estimated probability is above 0.95, it may constitute an argument (Eklund, Cursus, pp. 51 f.) and since 1 is the highest estimated probability possible, one may take the velox ending as an argument in faunur of the reading (a) tue subiaceant et obediant potestati. Yet it does not constitute absolute proof, since statistics can never be decisive in one particular case (Eklund, Cursus, p. 52). There remains the third, alternative reading which must be erroneous. First of all, it shares the drawback of alternative (b) in fornring no cursus. Secondly, it is impossible from the syntactical point of view, since the reviser could hardly have veritten tue... imperio et potestati. It may be added that the word imperium does not occur elsewhere in the text and that potestati is found alone in a similar passage in A 28: Dens pater omnia, que creata sunt, tue potestati subiecit (cf. also Rev. I 37:22 and VI 5 C). To sum up, the reading (a) tue subiaceant et obediant potestati was probably in the original of the Å text, whereas the readings (b) and (c) are errors. It is possible, however, although unlikely, that the reading (b) tuo subiaceant et obe- diant imperio et potestati was in the original, in which case readings (a) and (b) are erroneous. The reading (a) tue subiaceant et obediant potestati has been printed. This passage was used in the discussions concerning the top of the stemma codicum (section 6.3). 39 It is not possible to assume an elision of the -o of imperio and to classify imperi(o) et potestati — - - — —) as a variant of velox. First of all, elision was probably not practised in creating cursus (Lindholm, pp. 34 ff.; Janson, p. 32). Secondly, the velox variant 1 — — — — — is extremely rare (Lindholm, p. 46). 5 - Sten Eklund 
 
 
 
 
 54 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM 69 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia (quia Gh qui cett.) auribus tuis . . . libenter . . exaudis omnes . . ideo benedicte sint ille aures tue . . . In Or. III, there are a good many paragraphs (65-68; 70-73; 77) with the structure quia... ideo (idcirco) + the subjunctive (in A 77 dignum est, vt). In all these cases, the A reading was obviously quia, although individual MSS quite often have the error qui (in the nine paragraphs just listed, 11 MSS have this error). Now, there are four paragraphs in which the reading qui is strongly supported by the MSS; one of them is paragraph 69 quoted above and the others are as follows: A 74 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia (quia A" [ex qui in quia corr. Aa« Ee Gh Nh qui Itt [exc. Aal Ha 9 [deest Ad] p Li3 K) . . . barbam speciosam in tua facie . . . portasti, ideo sempiterne veneretur . . . barba tua . . .; A 76 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui digne ab omnibus appellaris dux, quia (quia Gh qui cett.) crucis . . . sarcinam . . . humeris et collo portasti, antequam . . . reduceres, idcirco tuo . . . collo et humeris . . . sit honor et gloria . . .; A 79 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia (quia conieci qui codd.) venerandis manibus et brachiis tuis vires Sampsonis . . . excessisti, dum . . . sustin- uisti et . . . rapuisti, idcirco eisdem membris tuis . . . exhibeatur . . . reuerencia . . . With the reading qui in these passages, the text is somewhat anacoluthic, since ideo / idcirco does not have a clear reference. There are instances of anacoluthon in the Q0 (see the Grammatical index, "Syntactical structures, Anacoluthon"), so it is not impossible that the A reviser could have allowed himself to use the construction qui . . . ideo I idcirco and, furthermore, the fact that so many scribes did accept the reading indicates that it is not especially striking. On the other hand, qui is a trifling error for quia (as may be seen from the 11 MSS with the particular error qui... ideo I idcirco mentioned above) and qui . . . ideo / idcirco in the four passages from A 69, 74, 76 and 79 may very well be an error of the archetype for quia . . . ideo I idcirco. In some of the paragraphs, which undoubtedly have quia . . . ideo / idcirco (A 67, 68, 71, 73), the Old Swedish text has thy at (OSB 28, 29, 32, 34). Now, in one of the dubious passages, A 79, the Old Swedish text, OSB 40, likewise offers thy at, which may be taken as an indication that the Latin originally had quia, not qui. I have printed quia in A 79 and also in A 69, 74, 76 but admit that the question is not finally settled. 69 . . . benedicte sint ille (ille p 1,13 Gh S ipse µ [exc. 0] H' Ee 0 om. 0) aures tue . . The distribution among the MSS does not give any guidance. I have noted 15 other occurrences of the pronoun ille in the A text (the prologue, i.e. A 1-5, excluded) and 25 occurrences of ipse. These figures do not tell us anything in themselves, but there seem to be two differences between the two groups of passages. The pronoun ipse is used as an attribute on nine occasions and substantively on 16 occasions, whereas ille is attributive on 12 occasions and substantival on three occasions only. Furthermore, the pronoun ipse refers to God or Christ on no less then 18 occasions and to other persons and things on the remaining seven occa- 
 
 
 
 
 8.7. PASSAGES DISCUSSED 55 sions only; ille refers to Christ on three occasions only and to other persons and things on 12 occasions. These tendencies are not especially reliable, owing to the limited number of occurrences, but, since there are no other indications in A 69, I have followed them: the pronoun in A 69 is attributive and does not refer to God or Christ (it is true that the ears belong to Christ, but the pronoun refers to the ears, not to Christ himself) and for that reason I have chosen ille (admitting that ipse is also possible). 69 . . . benedicte sint ille aures tue et eternaliter omni (tue et eternaliter omni pi [exc. J H Ab m d] Ha 0 p Lr3 Gh in ras. K2 tue et eterno omni Nb tue et eternaliter cum J tue eternaliter omni H Ab m Ee ex tue eternaliter et omni in tue et eternaliter omni corr. d) repleantur honore. In this passage there are two errors. The et before eternaliter is missing in some of the MSS (H Ab m Ee ), which is a very trifling error and may have been committed independently on more than one occasion. Furthermore, the Nb MS offers eterno instead of eternaliter and in K the words tue et eternaliter omni are written in an erasure, the length of which suits the idea that K1 had the Nb reading eterno (for other passages in which K offers corrections of errors present in Nb, see section 6.5 The Nb K (?) reading eterno omni repleantur honore does not look very good. The asyndetic coordination — or is it subordination? — of eterno and omni is clumsy and contrary to the practice of the reviser. Both eternus and eternaliter are frequently used in the 00 to express the idea that some act of joy, blessing, praise or adoration of something is to be eternal (17 occasions; on four occasions only are the words used in other contexts, A 26, 32, 56, 66). In such expressions, the adjective eternus appears only in two specific, syntactical structures. It may be linked to a verbal noun, which is the subject of a form of esse, as in A 52 Laus eterna et graciarum accio sint tibi, Domine (the other passages of this kind: A 27, 54, 55, 61). The other use is in the expression in eternum (which is, of course, synonymous with eternaliter, for which see below), for example, Å 80 benedicantur et honorentur in eternum preciose coste tue (another passage is A 65). The adverb eternaliter occurs in contexts of praise etc. on nine occasions (A 27, 29, 70, 76, 78, 79, 96, 101, 102) and has a broader use than eternus. On two occasions, it appears in passages similar to those just quoted with the adjective eternus (impendi almost synonymous with esse): A 76 tuo benedicto collo . . . sit honor et gloria eternaliter sine fine; 70 odor suauitatis et laudis eis (= naribus tuis) ab omnibus eternaliter impendatur. In one passage of this type, the A reviser even preferred the adverb eternaliter to the adjective eternus, in spite of the fact that he broke up the syntactic structure of the coordinate expressions: A 79 eisdem membris tuis . . . exhibeatur incessabilis reuerencia, laus eternaliter et gloria sempi- terna. 
 
 
 
 
 56 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM Normally, however, eternaliter is combined with other verbs than esse (or its synonyms): A 96 benedicantur brachia tua... et eternaliter honorentur; 101 lauden- tur eternaliter pedes tui; 102 Deus pater... eternaliter collaudetur (cf. A 27, 29, 78). To sum up, the adverb eternaliter is used very freely to express the idea that some act of praise etc. is to be eternal, whereas the use of eternus in the same sense is limited to the position as an attribute to a verbal noun, which in turn is the subject of a form of esse and to the phrase in eternum. This tells against the reading eterno in Å 69. Thus, considering the akwardness of the constellation eterno omni and the current practice of the A reviser, it seems probable that he wrote eternaliter in the passage under discusssion and that eterno is an error (although there is no absolute proof). 78 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, extrenui (extre[n]ui Ee p Lf3 Gh K extremi Ha NI' stren[n]ui µ [exc. P] 0 ex extrenui in strenui corr. P) milites et fideles seruitores huius seculi vitam suam morti libenter exponunt in hello . . . The g MS obviously had strenui, whereas 8 had extrenui (the reading extremi is not acceptable from the point of view of the contents; for the concordance of Ha Nb, see at the end of section 6.5). This passage is different from the others listed in section 6.5, in which g and b disagree, since, in the present case, h (not g) is backed by Ee p LI3 Gh. For that reason, I have printed the ö reading extrenui. 86 . . . laudetur cesaries tua (tua om. e deest 0) cum capillis tuis (tuis om. b deest 0) dyademate glorie decorata . . . There are six more passages in which some part of the body which is being praised or mentioned is connected with another part by means of the preposition cum and in all of these (with one exception, which is not relevant),40 there is a possessive pronoun attached to both parts of the body: A 95 honoretur perpetuo collum tuum cum humeris tuis (tuis om. et supra lin. suppl. d); Å 19, 82, 92, 94, 96. In view of these passages, it seems probable that both tua and tuis were originally in the passage from A 86; accordingly, the omission of tua is a manifest error (it was used to establish the E group, see subsection 6.6.3) and the omission of tuis is an error common to the ö MSS K Nb (which was used to bring these MSS together, see section 6.5). It is interesting to see that, in the passage from A 95 quoted above, the d scribe omitted the word tuis just as did probably the ö scribe in the passage from A 86 (although the d scribe corrected his mistake). 4° Å 88 cuius supercilia cum palpebris is not relevant, since the syntactical structure differs on account of the relative pronoun cuius. 
 
 
 
 
 8.7. PASSAGES DISCUSSED 57 95 . . . numquam . . . membra tua inclinasti nisi propter aliquid vtile vel honoris (honoris A [exc. Aaa ej honorem A" E deest 0) Dei . . . The idea of doing things which are useful (for one's own soul or for other people) and in honour of God appears on other occasions as weil, e.g. Rev. II 25 B . . . si considerat . . quis honor Dei ex hoc prouenit, que vtilitas ad proximum, que commoditas ad animam, et noluerit facere, nisi aliquam vtilitatem diuinam in opere suo pependerit esse, tunc opus illud habebit bonum processum. Thus, there can be no doubt as regards the meaning. The reading honoris is very weil attested and must have been in the archetype. However, from the point of view of syntax, honoris is a hard reading and honorem is betters the latter is obviously a conjecture made by the Aaa and e copyists. I have been very much in doubt whether to follow them and conjecture honorem but have retained honoris for two reasons. First of all, it is curious that so many scribes should have left honoris unchanged if it was not an acceptable reading. Secondly, it is true that I have not found any parallels in mediaeval Latin texts, but the following passage from ancient Latin shows that there is nothing in principle to prevent the coordination of an adjective and a genitive: Plaut. Pseud. 759 f. . . . quidquid incerti mi in animo prius aut ambiguom fuit, nunc liquet . . . 95 . . . ita omnia membra tua mouebantur (membra tua mouebantur Ha Ee p LP Gh tua membra semper mouebantur p [exc. Aau Hl tua membra mouebantur Aa“ membra tua semper mouebantur H deest 0) ad Spiritus Sancti infusionem. In this passage, the question is whether there was a semper in the text or not. There are no decisive arguments from the syntax or the content, but the Old Swedish version gives the clue, since it runs thus: OSB 79 . . . Swa rordes thina lymmi cepter thces hcelgha anda inskiytilsom. Under these circumstances, it is more likely that semper was erroneously added in the g MS than that it was added in A and dropped out again in some ancestor(s) of the other MSS, although it is true that the A reviser expanded the text by means of similar additions. The erroneous addition of semper has been used to establish the p and g groups (section 6.4 above). 100 . . . venter tuus (= Marie) virgo et fecundissimus (virgo et fecundissimus Y P Aau B d Za [et del.? Za] Ee p [et eras. p] Gh Nb virgo fecundissimus E H LR K virgo maria fecundissimus Ab m virgo est fecundissimus Ha et virgo et fecundissimus AaP deest 0) benedictum fructum Deo Patri attulit plusquam millesimum. It seems most likely that the archetype A had the reading virgo et fecundissimus (otherwise this reading must have arisen independently on more occasions than one). Some of the scribes have corrected this reading by removing the word et (t H LP K) or by replacing it by Maria (Ab). The question is whether the Å text is 
 
 
 
 
 58 8. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TEXTS AND TEXTUAL CRITICISM corrupt or whether it could be defended in some way. I think that the conjecture offered by the Aaf3 scribe gives a clue. He has regarded virgo and fecundissimus as appositions to venter and clarified this structure by adding an et before virgo: " your womb, which is both virgin and most fruitful .". Now, the same interpreta- tion can be given to the Å text without any et before virgo (removing the word "both" from the English translation just given), which means that virgo almost has the function of an adjective and is attached to the masculine noun venter. In the Birgitta corpus (section 2.3), I have found three instances of a similar use of virgo: Rev. I 20:13 Nec vmquam seminarius humor de corpore eius (scil. lohannis) exiuit et ideo bene potest vocari angelus et virgo; Rev. 147:6 qui non potest esse virgo, licite potest esse in coniugio; ES 3,15 suam matrem virginem discipulo virgini commendauit. 
 
 
 
 
 9. The apparatus The E text has been edited from the Oh fragment and in its apparatus have been listed a few dubious readings and errors in the fragment. As regards the A text, the critical apparatus has been built up in the usual way and conclusions may be drawn e silentio concerning the MSS listed as "codices adhibiti" at the beginning of each prayer. Index figures have been used to distinguish the original scribe from a later corrector whenever such a distinction is possible (e.g. postea K 1 eum ante postea supra lin. suppl. K2). When the distinction cannot be made (which happens quite often with microfilms), there are no index figures (e.g. ex fructiferos in fructiferas supra lin. corr. Y). Orthographic details have generally not been listed in the apparatus. In the second prayer (A 33-62), the o MS has the words Pater noster added in the margin at the beginning of each of the 60 paragraphs; this has not been accounted for in the apparatus. Nor have the small headings added in the margins of o in prayers III-IV (A 63-103), i.e. ad corpus, ad caput, etc. In prayers II-IV, the Ab MS has paragraph numbers added in the margin and these have not been accounted for. In the apparatus of the A text have been included references to the introduction when a passage is discussed there. However, these references are limited to passages in which the reading of the archetype is more or less open to doubt or passages which are interesting from some other special point of view. References are not given for passages used to establish the lower parts of the stemma codicum (or individual errors which prove that a MS is not an ancestor of any other MS). The A text has also been equipped with an apparatus containing quotations and reminiscences and I am quite aware of the fact that such an apparatus can never be complete. In paragraphs 64-83 and 85-102 are praised various parts of the bodies of Christ and of St. Mary respectively. Similar praises are to be found in many prayers and other eulogistic writings. I did not find it reasonable to collect in the apparatus, for each separate part of their bodies, all similar passages I have encountered, since such an account would take up a great deal of space and imply numerous repetitions. Instead, I give here some references to texts in which parts of the bodies of Christ and of St. Mary are praised in a way similar to that of the QO: Rev. V rev. 4:5-21; SvB 32a-b (pp. 83-93), 139 (pp. 326-331), 140 (pp. 332- 334), 141a-b (pp. 334-335); MDB 241a-b (2, pp. 142-145). 
 
 
 
 
 60 9. THE APPARATUS The A text, finally, is represented in this edition by the OSB MS and the apparatus explains peculiarities in the OSB MS only. Abbreviations in the OSB MS have been indicated by means of italic letters in the current text.41 41 The abbreviations for Christ have been treated in the following way. When there are only Greek letters (generally in the nominative case), the whole word has been italicized, for example, OSB 3 xpc = Christus; when there are Latin letters involved in the abbreviation, these have not been italicized, for example, OSB 34 xpe = Christe. 
 
 
 
 
 PART B The texts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THE E TEXT 42 . . . mi Ihesu Christe, benedicentur lumbi tui et laudentur super omnem angelicam mundiciam in celo et super omnium puritatem, qui castitatem seruauerunt in hoc mundo, quoniam omnium castitas tue mundicie minime valet comparari. 43 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, glorificentur genua tua cum poplitibus et tybijs super omnes, qui suis magistris honorera exibent, quoniam cum omni humilitate ante discipulos tuos flectebantur. 44 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, benedicentur perhenniter tui pedes super omnes magistros, qui sapienciam adepti sunt, quoniam durio- rem viam elegerunt quam allos incedere docuerunt. 45 Domine Ihesu Christe, honor et gaudium sit toti sacratissimo corpori tuo cum omnibus eius membris a summitate verticis vsque ad ymum plantarum tuarum, quod in memoriam tue dignissime passio- nis humanis oculis in specie panis, coram angelis autem et tota celesti curia cum humanitate et deitate viuentem te ostendis ex tua ineffabili caritate. 46 Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, Dei mater sanctissi- ma, cuius tu es vere optima creatura nullusque tam intime sicut tu ipsum diligebat. 46 es vere optima creatura, cf. Rev. V int. 9:1; int. 9:8-12; SA 4:15-19; 13:19-24; 20:15 42 quoniam] quoniam aut quia (qrn aut qui) Ob - 43 quoniam] quoniam aut quia (q—m- aut qui) Ob 44 quoniam] quoniam aut quia (qrn" aut qui) Ob 46 sanctissima aut sacratissima (scissima aut stissima) Ob - cut post sicut repetivit Ob - - - 
 
 
 
 
 64 10. THE E. TEXT 47 Gloria sit tibi, Virgo Maria, mater Dei, que per eundem angelum, quo et filius tuus, patri et matri tue nunciata es et de honestissimo coniugio concepta et genita es. 48 Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que statim, dum ablactata eras, a parentibus a<d> templum Dei ferebaris et custodie deuoti episcopi cum aliis virginibus fuisti mancipata. 49 Laus sit tibi, domina mea Virgo Maria, que, dum ad tantam etatem deuenisses, vt Deum intelligeres tuum existere creatorem, confestim ipsum intime amare super omnia incepisti diei noctisque tempora per diuersa officia ad Dei honorem distinguendo, sompnum quoque ac cibum corporis tui temperando, vt ad seruiendum Deo existeres magis apta. 50 Gloria sit tibi, domina mea . . . 47 patri et matri tue nunciata es, cf. Leg. Aur. CXXXI (pp. 587 sq.) 47 filius tuus (tibi nunciatus est), Vulg. Matth. 1,18-25; Luc. 1,26-38 47 honestissimo coniugio, cf. SA 10:7 48 dum ablactata eras . . . fuisti mancipata, cf. Leg. Aur. CXXXI (pp. 588 sq.) 48 a templum Ob 
 
 
 
 
 THE A TEXT 1 Prohemium in oraciones subscriptas, que fuerunt diuinitus reuelate beate Birgitte de regno Swecie. 2 Cum beata Birgitta semper peteret et rogaret Deum, quatenus sibi infunderet aliquem gratum modum orandi, contigit quadam die ipsa orante, quod miro modo eleuata fuit in spiritu quadam eleuacione mentali. 3 Et tunc infuse fuerunt sibi diuinitus quedam oraciones pulcerrime de vita et passione et laude Christi et de vita, compas- sione et laude beatissime Virginis Marie. 4 Quas postea ipsa semper ita memoriter tenuit, quod cottidie eas deuote legebat. Vnde beata Virgo Maria postea quadam vice apparens ei in oracione dixit: 5 "Ego promerui tibi illas oraciones. Ideoque, quando has legeris deuote, visitaberis consolacione filii mei." Prohemium (§§ 1-5) in sola editione principe (Gh) exstat 1 prohemium . . . swecie confer rubricam codicum Ee p K: iste oraciones subscripte fuerunt diuinitus reuelate beate brigitte de regno suecie 
 
 
 
 
 66 11. THE A TEXT 6 In ista oracione a Deo reuelata beate Birgitte deuote et pulcre laudatur gloriosa Virgo Maria de sancta concepcione et infancia sua et de omnibus virtuosis actibus et laboribus et magvis doloribus totius vite sue et de sanctissima morte et assumpcione sua. Oracio 1. 7 (= A) Benedicta et venerabilis sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, Dei mater sanctissima, cuius tu vere es optima creatura et nullus vmquam tam intime eum dilexit sicut tu, domina gloriosa. 8 Gloria tibi sit, domina mea Virgo Maria, mater Dei, que ab illo angelo, quo Christus tibi nunciatus fuit, ab eodem eciam tu patri et matri tue nunciata fuisti et de eorum coniugio honestissimo concepta et genita extitisti. 9 Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que in tua infancia sanctissima statim post ablactacionem tuam a parentibus tuis in templo Dei portata fuisti et custodie deuoti pontificis cum aliis virginibus commissa extitisti. 10 Laus sit tibi, domina mea Virgo Maria, que, cum ad illam etatem peruenisti, quod Deum intelligeres tuum existere creatorem, confes- 6 concepcione, cf. Rev. I 9; VI 49; VI 55; SA 10 7 es optima creatura, cf. Rev. V int 9:1; int 9:8-12; SA 4:15-19; 13:19-24; 20:15 8 Christus tibi nunciatus fuit, Vulg. Matth. 1,18-25; Luc. 1,26-38 8 patri et matri tue nunciata fuisti, cf. Leg. Aur. CXXXI (pp. 587 sq.) 8 eorum coniugio honestissimo, cf. SA 10:7 9 post ablactacionem . . . commissa exitisti, cf. Leg. Aur. CXXXI (pp. 588 sq.) Codices adhibiti: §§ 6-32: Y Aaa o J Ab Za (des. §§ 6-18) Gh Nb K 6 in . . . birgitte] hec oracio fuit a deo reuelata beate brigide in qua Y A' o J (siue meditacio subscripta post oracio add. J) Ab (vide pp. 25 sq. et 43) — sequenti post oracione add. Nb — brigide Y A' o J Ab b. Nb — gloriosa om. o — et (ante infancia)] de o — etc post assumpcione sua add. Gh Nb — oracio I om. Y A' o J Ab N" oracio prima diuinitus reuelata Gh oracio K (vide pp. 39 sq.) — 7 n ante mea del. Aaa — cuius om. o J — 8 sit tibi Aaa Gh (vide p. 44)— mea om. o J — est ante ab illo add. Ab — ex tibi christus in christus tibi corr. Aaa — fuit om. Ab — de om. Gh — 9 intu ante in tua del. Ab — 10 tibi sit Y K ex sit tibi in tibi sit corr. Nb tibi om. A' (vide p. 44) — ex tuum intelligeres in intelligeres tuum corr. A' — 
 
 
 
 
 §§6r-13 67 tim ipsum intime amare super omnia incepisti et tunc diurna tua tempora et nocturna per diuersa officia et exercicia ad Dei honorem discretissime ordinasti sompnumque et cibum tui gloriosi corporis taliter moderasti, quod ad seruiendum Deo existeres semper apta. 11 Infinita gloria sit tibi, domina mea Virgo Maria, que virginitatem tuam ipsi Deo humiliter vouisti et ideo non curasti, quis te desponsa- ret, quia tu sciebas, quod ille, cui tu prius fidem dederas, potencior et melior erat vniuersis. 12 (= B) Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que sola stabas ardore diuini amoris accensa, tota mente totaque virtute virium eleuata, altissimum Deum, cui tuam virginitatem obtuleras, ardenter diligens contemplando, quando angelus a Deo fult missus ad te et te salutando Dei voluntatem tibi annunciabat. Cui tu respondens ancil- lam Dei te humilime professa fuisti et illico Spiritus Sanctus omni virtute mirabiliter te repleuit, Deus Pater Filium suum sibi coeter- num et coequalem tibi misit. Qui in te veniens de carne et sanguine tuo sibi tunc corpus humanum assumpsit et sic in illa hora benedicta Dei Filius in te factus est filius tuus viuens cum omnibus membris suis non tamen amissa diuina maiestate. 13 Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que Christi corpus a tuo benedicto corpore creatum in tuo vtero sensisti semper crescere et moueri vsque ad tempus sue natiuitatis gloriose. Quem tu ante 12 angelus . . . annunciabat, Vulg. Luc. 1,26-37 12 ancillam . . . fuisti, Vulg. Luc. 1,38 intime ipsum A' — incepisti] cepisti A" — tua] sua o — moderabaris Gh — 11 ipsi om. A' — et (ante ideo) om. A' — tu (ante prius) om. K — prius] prior A' — 12 virium om. o — tuam virginitatem obtuleras] tu virginitatem obtuleras tuam Aaa ex tuum (-um ?) virginitatem tuam obtuleras in tuam virginitatem obtuleras corr. At' — humilimam Ab — illico om. Gh — -s- ante -a verbi professa in ras. K2 — filium suum sibi] suum sibi suum sibi J — filium post coequalem add. J — de ante sanguine add. A' — tuo sibi] suo et abbreviationem quandam Kl tuo sibi K2 — humanum corpus K — in te in marg. A' — est factus A' — filius tuus K — tamen om. o J — potestate et ante maiestate add. A' — 13 vtero om. J — 
 
 
 
 
 68 11. THE A TEXT omnes tuis sanctis manibus attrectasti, pannis inuoluisti ac iuxta prophete vaticinium in presepio reclinasti et sacratissimo tuorum vberum lacte eum cum exultacionis gaudio maternaliter educasti. 14 Gloria sit tibi, o domina mea Virgo Maria, que domum contemp- tibilem, idest stabulum, inhabitans reges potentes a longe ad filium tuum venire vidisti regalia exennia cum maxima reuerencia tuo filio humiliter offerentes. Quem postmodum tuis preciosis manibus in templo presentasti et in tuo benedicto corde omnia ab eo audita et visa in eius infancia diligenter conseruasti. 15 (= C) Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que cum prole illa sanctissima in Egyptum fugisti, quam postea in Nazareth cum gaudio apportasti, et ipsum tuum filium tibi et Ioseph in accrescencia sui corporis humilem et obedientem vidisti. 16 Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que filium tuum predicantem, miracula facientem et apostolos eligentem vidisti, qui eius exemplis, miraculis et doctrinis illuminati veritatis testes effecti sunt Ihesum tuum et Dei Filium veraciter existere diuulgando cunctis 13 manibus attrectasti, cf. SA 17:6 13 pannis . . . reclinasti, Vulg. Luc. 2,6 14 reges . . . offerentes, Vulg. Matth. 2,1-12 14 in templo presentasti, Vulg. Luc. 2,22-39 14 in . . . corde . . . conseruasti, Vulg. Luc. 2,51 15 cum prole . . . apportasti, Vulg. Matth. 2,13-23 15 humilem . . . vidisti, Vulg. Luc. 2,51 16 apostolos eligentem, Vulg. loh. 1,37-51; Marc. 1,16-20; Luc. 5,27-29 sanctis tuis manibus J — attractasti o Gh Nb — ac] et Kl- ac K2 — eum om. o J Ab — 14 tibi st (st del.) sit Ab (vide p. 44) — o ante virgo maria loc. Nb — domum] ex deum in domum in marg. corr. Ab — ad filium tuum alonge A' — exenia A' ensenia Y encenia Ab — filio tuo A' — preciosissimis Y A' o J Ab (vide pp. 44 sq.) — tuo (ante benedicto) om. o — 15 virgo maria in marg. A' — filium tuum ante cum prole add. (cf. § 16) o — egiptum o J Ab K — cum gaudio in nazarreth A' — nazarreth /Ca nazaret Nb — appor- (verbi apportasti) in ras. Ab — tuum filium] filium tuum o — iosep Nb — 16 et post effecti sunt add. Ab — dei in marg. Ab — diuulgando] diuulgantes Gh asserentes diuulgando o J (vide pp. 46 sq.) — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 14-19 69 gentibus, quod ipse erat, qui prophetarum scripturas per seipsum adimpleuerat, quando pro humano genere durissimam mortem pa- cienter sustinuerat. 17 Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que filium tuum debere captivari antea presciuisti et eum postea ligatum et flagella- tum, spinis coronatum crucique nudum clauis affixum et multos eum contempnentes et proditorem vocantes tuis beatis oculis dolorose vidisti. 18 Honor sit tibi, domina mea Virgo Maria, que filium tuum de cruce tibi loquentem cum dolore conspexisti et in mortis agonia ad Patrem clamantem et animam suam in eius manibus recommendantem tuis benedictis auribus dolenter audiuisti. 19 Laus sit tibi, domina mea Virgo Maria, que filium tuum in cruce pendentem a vertice capitis vsque ad plantas pedum liuidum et proprio sanguine rubricatum et sic crudeliter mortuum cum amaro dolore vidisti necnon et pedes ac manus ipsius vna cum suo glorioso latere transforata totamque cutem eius sine aliqua misericordia lace- ratam amarissime conspexisti. 17 debere captivari antea presciuisti, cf. SA 17:6 sqq. 17 eum postea . . . vidisti, Vulg. loh. 19,25 18 tibi loquentem, Vulg. loh. 19,26 18 ad patrem clamantem, Vulg. Matth. 2 7,46; Marc. 15,34; cf. Rev. I 2 7:4; SA 18:14 18 animam . . . recommendantem, Vulg. Luc. 23,46 19 que . . . conspexisti, cf. Rev. 110:17 sqq.; I 2 7:5 sqq.; 135:5 sqq.; II 21 A; III 13 F; IV 70 quando in ras. supra lin. K2 — patienter om. N" — -r sustinuerat in ras. K2 — 17 captivari debere o debere om. Nb Kl supra lin. in ras. suppl. K2 (vide p. 27) — eum (ante postea) om. et supra lin. suppl. N" om. K1 supra lin. in ras. (?) suppl. K2 (vide p. 27) — 18 mea om. o — tibi de cruce A' — -nibus recommend- in ras. novem fere litterarum K2 — dolenter] dulciter o — audisti A' — 19 tibi sit Y J Nb K (vide p. 44) — amaro] amoro Nb amarissimo J — pedes et manus Aaa Ab — glorioso suo o J Ab — transformata o transforatos K — aliqua] omni K — 6 - Sten Eklund 
 
 
 
 
 70 11. THE A TEXT 20 (= D) Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que filium tuum de cruce deponi, pannis inuolui, in monumento sepeliri et ibi a militibus custodiri tuis lacrimosis oculis vidisti. 21 Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que intrinseco dolore tui cordis grauissime lacessita a tui filii sepulcro separata fuisti et ab amicis eius ad domum Iohannis tota plena dolore portata extitisti et ibi statim releuamen tui magni doloris sensisti, quia filium tuum cito resurrecturum certissime presciuisti. 22 Gaude, dignissima domina mea Virgo Maria, quia in eodem puncto, quo filius tuus a morte resurrexit, tibi, sue beatissime matri, hoc innotescere voluit, quia illico tibi per seipsum apparuit, deinde aliis personis se illum esse a morte resuscitatum ostendit, qui in corpore suo viuo mortem amarissime pertulit. 23 Gaude igitur, dignissima domina mea Virgo Maria, que, morte deuicta et mortis actore supplantato celique introitu patefacto per filium tuum, resurgentem et corona victorie triumphantem vidisti et quadragesimo die post resurreccionem suam honorifice vt regem sociatum angelis ad suum regnum celorum videntibus multis ascen- dere conspexisti. 20 que . . . vidisti, Vulg. Matth. 27,57-66; Marc. 15,42-47; Luc. 23,50-56; loh. 19,38-42; Rev. 110:34-36 21 ad domum Iohannis . . . portata extitisti, Rev. 110:37 22 in eodem puncto . . . apparuit, Rev. VI 94 A; SA 19:8-9; Leg. Aur. LIV (pp. 241 sq.) 22 deinde . . . ostendit, Vulg. Matth. 28,9-10; Marc. 16,9-18; Luc. 24,13-51; loh. 20,14- 21,23; Leg. Aur. LIV (pp. 239-242) 23 quadragesimo die . . . conspexisti, Vulg. Marc. 16,19; Luc. 24,51; act. 1,9-11; Leg. Aur. LXXII (pp. 318 sqq.) 20 tuum om. o — et post inuolui add. o J — 21 domina . . . maria] virgo maria domina Y — lacessita grauissime A" — filii tui J — eius] suis o J — extitisti] fuisti A" — et ibi] vbi A' — reuelamen o — 22 resurrexit... esse a morte om. et in marg. suppl. Ab — illum om. Kl supra lin. suppl. K2 — amarissime om. Gh — 23 deuicto J — auctore J — supplantato] plantato (duas litteras ante plantato del?) o — per om. J Gh Nb (vide pp. 47 sq.) — et (ante corona) om. A' — corone o — vidisti et] et NI" ipsum Kl vidisti post ipsum supra lin. suppl. K2 (vide pp. 47 sq.) — quadragesima Gh — videntibus om. Ab — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 20-26 71 24 (= E) Exulta, dignissima domina mea Virgo Maria, quia videre meruisti, qualiter post ascensionem suam apostolis et discipulis suis Spiritum Sanctum, quo te antea totam repleuerat, filius tuus repente transmisit et augendo in eis caritatis feruorem et catholice fidei rectitudinem ipsorum corda mirabiliter illustrauit. 25 Letare insuper, domina mea Virgo Maria, et de tua leticia totus mundus letetur, quia post ascensionem suam ad amicorum suorum consolacionem et fidei roboracionem, indigencium auxilium et apos- tolorum sanum consilium in hoc mundo filius tuus multis annis te permanere permisit et tunc per tua verba prudentissima, gestus honestissimos et opera virtuosa innumerabiles Iudeos et infideles paganos ad catholicam fidem conuertit et te confiteri virginem rna- trem ipsumque tuum filium et Deum cum vera humanitate illuminan- do eos mirabiliter illustrauit. 26 Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, que ex ardenti caritate et materno amore indesinenter omni hora ad tam dilectum filium tuum iam in celo sedentem venire desiderasti. Et in hoc mundo tu degens ad celestia suspirando diuine voluntati te humiliter confor- masti, propter quod tibi dictante iusticia diuina eternam gloriam ineffabiliter augmentasti. 24 Spiritum Sanctum . . . transmisit, Vulg. act. 2,1-4; Rev. VI 36 A-B 24 quo te antea totam repleuerat, cf. SA 2:7 25 quia . . . illustrauit, Rev. VI 61 26 indesinenter . . . venire desiderasti, cf. Rev VI 62 A 24 satis post exulta del. (cf. § 30) NID — t post te del. Aa" — antea] in anima Abf aliter antea in marg. Abe — caritatis om. Ab — 25 ex benedicta sis tu (cf. § 26) in letare insuper corr. K1 — consilium] duas litteras inter con- et - silium eras. Za — verba tua o J — filium tuum o J — humanitate] humilitate A' o J (cf. OSB 63 gudh mz mandom) — 26 et (ante materno)] in Ab — iam in celo sedentem om. et in marg. suppl. Y — et (ante in) om. o — tu om. Y Aaa — quattuor litteras ante degens del. Ab — tibi om. A' — dictante] dictam te J — et ante eternam add. o — 
 
 
 
 
 72 ii. THE 0 TEXT 27 (= F) Sit tibi, o domina mea Virgo Maria, eternus honor et gloria, quia, quando Deo placuit a seculi huius exilio te eripere et tuam animam in regno suo eternaliter honorare, tunc per angelum suum hoc tibi dignatus est nunciare et venerabile corpus tuum iam mor- tuum per suos apostolos cum omni reuerencia in sepulcro voluit tumulare. 28 Gratulare, o domina mea Virgo Maria, quia in illa leuissima tua morte anima tua a Dei potencia amplexata extitit et ipse ab omni aduersitate eam paternaliter custodiendo protexit. Et tunc ipse Deus Pater omnia, que creata sunt, tue potestati subiecit et Dei Filius te, suam dignissimam matrem, in sede sublimissima secum honorifice collocauit, Sanctus quoque Spiritus ad regnum suum gloriosum te, sibi desponsatam Virginem, deferendo mirabiliter exaltauit. 29 Gaude eternaliter, domina mea Virgo Maria, quia post tuam mortem aliquantis diebus corpus tuum in sepulcro iacuit tumulatum, donec per Dei potenciam denuo anime tue cum honore extitit copu- latum. 30 Exulta satis, o mater Dei, glorifica domina Virgo Maria, quia corpus tuum post tuam mortem simul cum anima viuificatum assumi in celum cum honore angelorum videre meruisti tuumque filium gloriosum cum humanitate Deum existere agnouisti ac eum esse 27 quia . . . tumulare, Rev. VI 62 28 leuissima morte, Rev. IV 23 B 29 aliquantis diebus, Rev. VI 62 B (quindecim diebus) 27 o om. Za post mea loc. Nb K (vide pp. 27 et 48 sq.) — deo om. et supra lin. suppl. Za post placuit loc. o J — est om. Za — 28 leuissima] lenissima A" K leuissima aut lenissima J Ab Nb om. o (vide p. 4325) — tua (ante morte) om. et supra lin. suppl. Nb post morte loc. K (vide pp. 27 sq.) — ex sublissima in sublimissima corr. A' — 29 potentia Za — denuo] domo o tue] tunc o J — 30 glorificata A' gloriosa J — mea post domina add. o J Ab — agnouisti] cognouisti Nb a- (verbi agnouisti) in ras. (litterarum co- ?) K2 (vide p. 28) — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 27-32 73 omnium iustissimum iudicem et bonorum operum remuneratorem cum exultacionis gaudio conspexisti. 31 (= G) Gaude eciam, domina mea Virgo Maria, quia tui corporis caro sanctissima se, virginem et matrem, iam in celo nouit existere nulloque mortali vel veniali crimine se vidit maculatam aliquatenus esse, ymmo omnia opera virtuosa tam caritatiue se nouit fecisse, quod Deum ex iusticia oportuit te summo honore venerari. Intel- lexisti tunc eciam, quod, quicumque Deum in hoc mundo ardencius amaret, ipse eum in celo iuxta se vicinius collocaret. Et quia toti celesti curie erat manifestum, quod nullus angelorum nec hominum tanta caritate, quanta tu, ipsum Deum amauit, idcirco dignum et iustum fuit, quod in summa sede glorie cum anima et corpore te ipse Deus honorifice collocauit. 32 Benedicta sis tu, o domina mea Virgo Maria, quia omnis creatura fidelis pro te sanctam collaudat trinitatem, eo quod tu eius creatura es dignissima, que pro miseris animabus veniam impetras promptissi- rna et pro omnibus peccatoribus existis aduocata et procuratrix fidelissima. Laudetur igitur Deus, summus imperator et dominus, qui te ad tantum honorera creauit, quod tu imperatrix et domina fieres perhenniter in regno celorum cum ipso eternaliter regnatura in secula seculorum. Amen. 32 creatura es dignissima, cf. Rev. V int. 9:1; int. 9:8-12; SA 4:19; 20:15 omnium om. J — 31 n ante mea del. Aaa — maculatum ex tam in tanta corr (?) Za — nouit se K — iuxta se om. J Ab — quanta] quam Za — virgo maria ante te add. Ab — collocaret o — 32 o om. Nb K (vide p. 28) — quia] quod Ab — collaudant Za — creatura eius A' o J — promptissimam K — et (ante pro) om. Ab Ab — 
 
 
 
 
 74 11. THE Å TEXT 33 Hec oracio fuit a Deo reuelata beate Birgitte; in qua pulcre et deuote laudatur Christus cum narracione seriosa de sua gloriosa incarnacione et de omnibus actibus et laboribus et doloribus vite et sanctissime mortis sue et de ascensione in celum et missione Spiritus Sancti in discipulos. Oracio 34 (=A) Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi, Deus meus et amor meus, dilectissime anime mee, qui es vnus Deus in tribus personis. 35 Gloria et laus sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui in corpus vnius virginis a Patre missus fuisti manens tamen cum Patre semper in celo et Pater cum sua diuinitate manens in tua humanitate insepa- rabiliter tecum in mundo. 36 Honor et gloria sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui in vtero Virginis conceptus de Spiritu Sancto corporaliter creuisti et in eo vsque ad tempus partus humiliter habitasti ac post iucundam natiui- tatem tuam ipsius tue matris mundissimis manibus tractari, pannis inuolui et in presepio reclinari dignatus fuisti. 37 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui carnem tuam immaculatam circumcidi, te quoque Ihesum vocari et a matre tua in templo offerri voluisti. 36 iucundam natiuitatem, SvB 122,3 (p. 243) 37 qui . . . voluisti, Vulg. Matth. 1,25; Luc. 2,21-39; SvB 122,8 et 10 (pp. 243 sq.); MDB 1062a (4, p. 328) Codices adhibiti: §§ 33-62: Y Aaa o J Ab Za Gh Nb K 33 benedictus ante hec add. et exp. Nb — subscripta post oracio add. J — beate] anime o — brigide Y A' o J Ab Za byrgitte Nb — sua] sui o J — incarnacione exp. (?) Nb — actibus et om. o — et doloribus om. Ab — ex ascencione in ascensione corr. Ab — sancti spiritus A' — apostolos ante discipulos exp. Aaa — etc post discipulos add. Y o Ab Gh K — oracio II om. Y A' o J Ab Za Nb oracio secunda Gh oracio K (vide pp. 39 sq.) — 34 meus (post amor) om. Nb K (vide p. 28) — dilectissime om. J — 35 et ante gloria add. Y J Ab — manens (ante tamen)] manes Gh — 36 honor] laus J — ihesu christe om. N" — concepta Gh — decreuisti Nb — in (ante presepio) om. J — 37 benedictus . . . voluisti om. J (vide p. 42) — 
 
 
 
 
 75 §§ 33-42 38 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui te in Iordane a seruitore tuo Iohanne baptizari fecisti. 39 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui tuo benedicto ore verba vite hominibus personaliter predicasti et coram eis per te ipsum multa miracula presencialiter operatus fuisti. 40 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui prophetarum scripturas adimplendo te Deum verum esse mundo racionabiliter manifestasti. 41 Benediccio et gloria sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui quadra- ginta diebus in deserto mirabiliter ieiunasti et a dyabolo, inimico tuo, temptari te permisisti, quem solo verbo a te, dum tibi placuit, expulisti. 42 (=B) Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui mortem tuam ante tempus predixisti et in ultima cena de pane materiali tuum corpus preciosum mirabiliter consecrasti ac eciam illud apostolis tuis in memoriam tue dignissime passionis caritatiue tribuisti et ipsorum pedes lauando tuis sanctis mansbus preciosis maximani humilitatem tuam humiliter ostendisti. 38 qui . . . fecisti, Vulg. Matth. 3,13-17; Marc. 1,9-11; Luc. 3,21-22; SvB 122,15 (p. 245); MDB 1062 a (4, p. 328) 41 qui . . . permisisti, MDB 1062 (4, p. 328) 41 qui . . . expulisti, Vulg. Matth. 4,1-11; Marc. 1,12-13; Luc. 4,1-13; SvB 122,16 (p. 245) 42 qui . . . ostendisti, Vulg. Matth. 26,17-29; Marc. 14,12-25; Luc. 22,7-38; loh. 13,1-38 42 in ultima cena . . . consecrasti, SvB 122,21 (p. 245) 38 benedictus . . . fecisti om. o (vide p. 42) — te post iohanne loc. J— -ane a seruitore tu- in ras. K2 — baptista post iohanne add. Nb — 39 mi domine Ab — 40 situ mi domine o — in ante mundo add. Za Nb — 41 mi domine Ab — tibi (ante placuit) om. o — 42 mi domine o Ab — con- (verbi consecrasti) in ras. K2 consecrasti om. durissime passionis J — J — eciam om. A" — tuis om. Ab — passionis dignissime humilitatem] caritatem Nb K (vide pp. 28 et 49) — 
 
 
 
 
 76 11. THE A TEXT 43 Honor sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui timore passionis et mortis de innocenti corpore tuo pro sudore sanguinem emisisti et nichilominus redempcionem nostram, quam facere volebas, perfecis- ti et taliter caritatem tuam, quam habebas ad genus humanum, manifestissime ostendisti. 44 Gloria sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui a discipulo tuo venditus et a Iudeis emptus et captivatus pro nobis fuisti et vnico tuo verbo inimicos tuos ad terram proiecisti, quorum immundis manibus rapacibus postmodum te captiuum spontanea voluntate tradidisti. 45 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui ad Caypham ductus fuisti; et tu, qui es iudex omnium, Pilati iudicio te tradi humiliter permisisti. 46 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui a Pilato iudice missus ad Herodem fuisti et te ab eo deridi et contempni permisisti et ad eundem Pilatum iudicem iterum remitti consensisti. 43 pro sudore sanguinem emisisti, Vulg. Luc. 22,44; Rev. 139:2-3; IV 81 H; IV 126 H 44 qui a discipulo . . . emptus, Vulg. Matth. 26,14-15; Marc. 14,10-11; Luc. 22,3-6; Ioh. 13,2 45 ad Caypham ductus fuisti, Vulg. Matth. 26,57; Marc. 14,53; Luc. 22,54; Ioh. 18,24 45 Pilati iudicio . . . permisisti, Vulg. Matth. 27,2; Marc. 15,1; Luc. 23,1; Ioh. 18,28; SvB 122,27 (p. 246) 46 a Pilato . . . ad Herodem, Vulg. Luc. 23,7; SvB 122,28 (p. 246) 46 ab eo deridi . . . et . . . remitti, Vulg. Luc. 23,11 43 mi domine Y o J Ab Za Gh (vide p. 50) — passionis timore J — passiones (?) Za — voluisti ante volebas exp. Nb — valebas J — tuam om. Ab — 44 tibi om. A" — mi domine Y o J Ab Za (vide p. 50) — et (post venditus) supra lin. J— et captivatus pro nobis om. o — 45 benedictus . . . permisisti om. J (vide pp. 42 sq.) — -s (verbi benedictus) in ras. K2 — mi domine Ab — christe om. A' — a pylato iudice missus ad herodem fuisti (cf. § 46) ante ad caypham del. Nb — cayfan A' — fuisti om. o — pylati Gh Nb K ex pylato in pylati corr. Ab — 46 pylato Ab Gh Nb K — h- (verbi herodem) in ras. K2 — et te . . . permisisti om. o — eo] eodem N" K (vide p. 28) — derideri tkau Gh K2 (deridi K1) ex deridi in derideri corr. Nb (vide pp. 50 sq.) — eundem om. Ab — pylatum Ab Gh Nb K — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 43-51 77 47 (=C) Gloria sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, pro derisione, quam sustinuisti, dum purpura indutus, spinis acutissimis coronatus stetisti, et quia in faciem tuam gloriosam conspui, oculos tuos velari ac in maxilla et collo ab iniquorum funestis manibus grauissime cedi pacientissime sustulisti. 48 Laus sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui ad columpnam ligari, immaniter flagellari et ante iudicium Pilati sanguinolentus duci et videri velut agnus innocens pacientissime permisisti. 49 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui ante Pilatum obprobria et mendacia tibi obici ac voces populi petentis reum latronem absolui et te innocentem condempnari tuis auribus bene- dictis pacientissime audire voluisti. 50 Honor sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui toto tuo glorioso corpore cruentato ad crucis mortem iudicatus fuisti tuisque sacris humeris crucem cum dolore portasti et ad locum passionis furibunde ductus vestibusque tuis spoliatus sic ligno crucis affigi voluisti. 51 Gloria immensa sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia sustinuisti pro nobis humiliter, vt Iudei tuas venerabiles manus et pedes cum 47-48, cf. Vulg. Matth. 26,67; 27,28-30; Marc. 14,65; 15,17-19; Luc. 22,63-65; 23,11; Ioh. 18,22; 19,1-3; 19,5; SvB 122,26 (p. 246); 122,30 (p. 247) 48 ad columpnam ligari, Rev. VI 10 C; VII 27:22 49 voces... audire, Vulg. Matth. 27,21-23; Marc. 15,11-14; Luc. 23,18-23; Ioh. 18,39-40; SvB 122,31 (p. 247) 50-51, Vulg. Matth. 27,26-44; Marc. 15,15-32; Luc. 23,24-39; Ioh. 19,16-24 50 crucem portasti, cf. SvB 122,32 (p. 247) 47 mi domine Ab — pro derisione] prederisione J — quia] qui o — massilla Y — manibus K2 (ut videtur, etiam K1 manibus scripsit) — sustulisti] sustinuisti in ras. K2 — 48 tibi sit J — pylati Ab Gh Nb K — sanguinolentum A' — 49 mi domine Ab — pylatum Ab Gh Nb K — obici ac] obiecta o J — voce A' — contemnari Aaa — ex tuis auribus benedictis auribus in tuis auribus benedictis corr. A' — 50 mi domine Y o Za (vide p. 50) — christe om. A" — tuo toto Ab — crucientato J — tuisque . . . portasti om. Nb — 51 mi domine Y Ab Za (vide p. 50) — quia] qui A J — 
 
 
 
 
 78 11. THE A TEXT fune extenderent et ligno crucis crudeliter ferreis clauis affigerent, te quoque proditorem vocarent et super te scripto confusionis titulo suis verbis nefandis te multipliciter deriderent. 52 (= D) Laus eterna et graciarum accio sint tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui cum tanta mansuetudine tam crudeles dolores pro nobis passus fuisti. Nam quando corpus tuum benedictum suis totis viribus exinaniuit in cruce, oculi tui benigni caligabant, speciosa facies tua ex diminucione sanguinis tota operiebatur pallore, lingua tua bene- dicta estuabat et siccabatur et ex amarissimo poculo madebat os tuum, crines et barba sanguine replebantur de vulneribus tui sanctis- simi capitis, ossa manuum et pedum tocius preciosi corporis tui disiungebantur a locis suis non sine tuo magno et intenso dolore, vene et tocius tui benedicti corporis nerui crudeliter rumpebantur et sic eras immaniter flagellatus et dolorosis vulneribus sauciatus, quod caro et cutis tua innocentissima tota erat intollerabiliter lacerata, et taliter afflictus et doloratus o tu, mi dulcissime Domine, in cruce stetisti et mortis horam cum dolore nimio pacienter et humiliter expectasti. 53 Honor perpetuus sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui positus in tali angustia tuam dignissimam matrem, que numquam peccauit nec eciam minimo peccato vmquam consensit, tuis benignis oculis carita- 51 ferreis clauis affigerent, cf. SvB 122,34 (p. 247) 52, cf. Rev. 1 10:22-23; SvB 31,2-3 (p. 77) 52 ex amarissimo poculo, cf. SvB 31,7 (p. 79); 122,39 (p. 248) extenderent post crucis del. (extenderent etiam suo loco habet) Ab - affligerent o - 52 eterna om. et in marg. suppl. A" - ex sint in sit corr. r - mi domine Y o Za Gh (vide p. 50) - exinaniuit] exinanitum fuit K - ca ante benigni del. A" - extuabat za extuabatur (?) Y - capitis in ras. quinque fere litterarum K - tociusque o - tui ante preciosi loc. K - tuo (ante magno) om. J - intenso] immenso Ab - dolorem (?) Ab - et tocius ante et tocius del. Ab - tui post corporis add. A' - dolorosis] doloris Ab doloribus J - cutis] ouis (omnis ?) J - taliter] totaliter J - dolorosus (-osus in ras. K2) K •- domine mi dulcissime Ab - nimio] immo o - 53 honor sit tibi perpetuus Ab - mi domine Y o Za Gh (vide p. 50) - claritatis Nb - 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 52-57 79 tis humiliter respexisti et consolando eam tuo dilecto discipulo custo- diendam fideliter commisisti. 54 (= E) Benediccio eterna sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui existens in mortis agonia omnibus peccatoribus spem de venia tri- buisti, quando latroni ad te conuerso paradisi gloriam misericorditer promisisti. 55 Laus eterna sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, pro qualibet hora, qua in cruce maximas amaritudines et angustias pro nobis, peccatori- bus, sustinuisti. Nam dolores acutissimi de tuis vulneribus proceden- tes dire tuam felicem animam penetrabant et cor tuum sacratissimum crudeliter pertransibant, donec crepante corde spiritum feliciter emi- sisti et inclinato capite in manus Dei, Patris tui, ipsum humiliter commendasti et tunc mortuus corpore totus frigidus remansisti. 56 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui tuo precioso sanguine et sacratissima morte animas redemisti et eas ad vitam eternam de exilio misericorditer reduxisti. 57 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui in ligno crucis mortuus pependisti et statim amicos tuos potenter de inferni carcere liberasti. 53 discipulo . . . commisisti, Vulg. loh. 19,25-27; cf. Rev. 110:23; VII 15:13-17; SvB 31,6 (p. 79); SvB 122,37 (p. 248) 54 quando . . . promisisti, Vulg. Luc. 23,39-43; cf. SvB 31,5 (p. 78); SvB 122,36 (p. 248) 55 in manus . . . commendasti, Vulg. Luc. 23,46; cf. SvB 122,41 (p. 248) 56-57, cf. QO 79; SA 18:21 dilecto om. Gh — custodiam Ab — 54 tibi om. et in marg. suppl. A' — mi domine Ab mi om. o — tribuisti] promisisti Ab — misericorditer om. Nb misericorditer promisisti in ras. octo fere litterarum K2 (vide pp. 28 et 51) — promisisti] tribuisti Ab — 55 mi domine Za — tres fere litteras ante penetrabant eras. Za — et (ante cor)] ex ad in et supra lin. corr. Ab — pertransibant] perlustrabant o — crepante] repente de o — manu o J — ipsum om. Ab post humiliter loc. A' — mortuo o J — 56 in ante tuo add. J — tuo om. o — eas] eos J — redusisti Za eduxisti Aaa — 57 benedictus . . . liberasti om. et in marg. suppl. Nb (vide p. 42) — 
 
 
 
 
 80 11. THE A TEXT 58 Benedictus sis tu, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui pro salute nostra tuum latus et cor perforari lancea permisisti et preciosum sanguinem tuum affluenter et aquam de eodem latere, vt nos redimeres, emisisti et, antequam licencia a iudice concederetur, corpus tuum sacratissi- mum deponi de cruce noluisti. 59 (= F) Gloria sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, pro eo, quod corpus tuum benedictum ab amicis tuis de cruce deponi et in mani- bus tue mestissime matris reclinari voluisti et ab ea pannis inuolui ac in monumento sepeliri, a militibus quoque ibidem custodiri permisis- ti. 60 Honor sempiternus sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui die tercia a mortuis resurrexisti et, quibus tibi placuit, te viuentem manifestasti, post quadraginta quoque dies ad celos multis videntibus ascendisti ibique amicos tuos, quos a tartaris liberaueras, honorifice collocasti. 61 Iubilacio et laus eterna sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui Sanctum Spiritum in discipulorum cordibus transmisisti et immen- sum amorem diuinum in eorum spiritibus augmentasti. 58 qui . . . emisisti, Vulg. Ioh. 19,34; cf. SvB 122,43 (p. 249) 58 antequam . . . noluisti, Vulg. Matth. 27,57-58; Marc. 15,42-45; Luc. 23,50-52; Ioh. 19,38 59, cf. Rev. Il 21 A; SvB 122,45-46 (p. 249) 60, SvB 122,48-50 (p. 250) 60 quibus . . . ascendisti, Vulg. Matth. 28,9-10; 28,16-20; Marc. 16,9-19; Luc. 24,13-51; Ioh. 20,14-21,23; act. 1,3-11 60 ibique . . . collocasti, cf. Rev. 154:36 61, Vulg. act. 2,1 sqq. 58 perforari] perfori J — i(?) post sanguinem add. A" — af- (verbi affluenter) in ras. K2 effluenter J — tuo post latere add. K — a iudice licencia o J Ab — concideretur J — tuum corpus A' — voluisti o — 59 tibi sit o tibi om. et post sit supra lin. suppl. A' — mi domine Y J Gh mi om. o Za — pro om. Gh — tue] tu o om. Ab — inuoluis o — sepeliri om. et repponi in marg. suppl. A' sepiliri Ab — et ante a militibus add. o — a om. J — septem fere litteras ante permisisti eras. Za — 60 mi domine A' o J Gh ex domine mi in mi domine corr. (?) Za mi domine mi Y (vide p. 50) — resuscitasti Y Abf (resurrexisti supra lin. Abe) resuscitasti in ras. Za te suscitasti Nb (vide p. 51) — ad celos om. o ad celum A' — ibique] ibi N" — 61 eterna om. o J — mi domine Y o Za Gh — christe om. Gh — spiritum sanctum Ab Za — transmisti o — cordibus et ante spiritibus add. Ab — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 58-62 81 62 Benedictus sis tu et laudabilis et gloriosus in secula, mi Domine Ihesu Christe, qui sedes super thronum in tuo regno celorum in gloria tue diuinitatis viuens corporaliter cum omnibus membris tuis sanctissimis, que de carne Virginis assumpsisti, et sic venturus es in die iudicii ad iudicandum animas omnium viuorum et mortuorum, qui viuis et regnas cum Patre et Spiritu Sancto in secula seculorum. Amen. 62 domine mi Ab — christe om. Gh — tuis membris Y A" J Ab Za (vide p. 4325) — ex ciuium (?) in omnium corr. A" - deo ante patre add. J (cf. § 103) 
 
 
 
 
 82 11. THE Å TEXT 63 In hac oracione a Deo reuelata beate Birgitte pulcre laudantur omnia membra sanctissimi corporis Domini nostri Ihesu Christi et virtuosissimi actus eius corporales. Oracio III. 64 (= A) Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quamuis ego bene scio, quod benedictum corpus tuum incessanter laudatur et glorificatur harmo- nia et iubilo celestium ciuium supernorum sed quia ex debito tibi teneor reddere infinitas graciarum acciones, ideo ego, licet sim persona insipiens et indigna, desidero tamen toto corde et ore meo omnibus membris tui preciosi corporis referre gracias, quas possum, laudem et honorem. 65 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia tu es vere summus sacerdos et pontifex, qui primo et ante omnes, vt nos saciares cibo angelorum, de pane materiali tuum verum et benedictum corpus mirabiliter consecrasti, ideo gloriosa sacerdotalis sedes tua sit ad dexteram Dei, Patris tui, in tua diuinitate beata et benedicta in eternum. Amen. 66 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, tu vere es caput omnium hominum et angelorum et dignus rex regum et dominus dominancium, qui omnia opera facis ex vera et ineffabili caritate. Et quia caput tuum benedic- tum corona spinea coronari humiliter permisisti, idcirco caput et capilli tui benedicti sint et honorentur gloriose dyademate imperiali celumque et terra et mare et omnia, que creata sunt, in eternum tue subiaceant et obediant potestati. Amen. 64, QO 85 Codices adhibiti: §§ 63-83: Y A' o J Ab Za La Bd Gh Nb K 63 in hac... oracio III om. La Bd — sequenti post oracione add. Nb — brigide Y A' o J Ab Za byrgitte Nb — oracio III om. Y Aaa o J Ab Za La Bd Nb oracio tercia Gh etc K (vide pp. 39 sq.) — 64 o ante domine add. La Bd — sciam A' — iubli ante iubilo del. Ab — tibi post reddere loc. K — ego om. Nb K post licet loc. La (vide pp. 52 et 28) — tui om. K — et graciarum acciones post gracias add. Ab — 65 vere es J (cf. § 66) — saciares] saluares J — angelico Za — ideo] et credo quod o — et ante sacerdotalis add. o J Ab Bd — sacerdotali La — dei om. Aaa — 66 es vere Za vere om. J (cf. § 65) — et (ante dignus) om. J — quia] ex qui in quia corr. Za — ornentur La Gh Nb K honerentur Bd (vide pp. 21 et 24 sq. et 52) — glorioso o J La (Bd ?) — omnia que in ras. (?) Za — tuo subiaceant et obediant imperio et potestati Y A" o (tuo ante imperio loc. o) J Ab Za Bd tue subiaceant et obediant imperio et potestati La Gh K2 (tue subiaceant et obediant potestati Kl) (vide pp. 21 sqq. et 52 sq.) — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 63-71 83 67 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia frons tua splendida numquam se auertit a recta iusticia et veritate, ideo benedicta sit eadem tua frons et regali ac triumphali gloria perpetuo collaudetur ab omnibus crea- turis. Amen. 68 (=B) Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia tuis fulgentibus oculis pieta- tis benigne respicis omnes, qui a te cum vera caritate graciam et misericordiam postulant, ideo benedicti sint oculi tui, palpebre et gloriosa supercilia tua totusque visus tuus amabilis et decorus inces- santer glorificetur ab omni celesti exercitu ciuium supernorum. Amen. 69 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia auribus tuis benignis libenter audis et exaudis omnes, qui te humiliter alloquuntur, ideo benedicte sint ille aures tue et eternaliter omni repleantur honore. Amen. 70 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia benedicte nares tue suauissime non horruerunt fetorem putridi cadaueris mortui Lazari neque eciam fetorem horridum, qui spiritualiter a proditore Iuda processit, quan- do te osculabatur, idcirco benedicte sint nares tue preciose et odor suauitatis et laudis eis ab omnibus eternaliter impendatur. Amen. 71 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia ore tuo et labiis tuis benedictis ad nostram corporalem et spiritualem salutem et instruccionem fidei 70 fetorem . . . Lazari, Vulg. Ioh. 11,39 67 splendidissima A' expledida (?) Bd — se auertit] seuertit Za ex se auertit se in se auertit corr. A" — frons tua L" ex frons tua in tua frons corr. A& — et (ante regali)] a o ex Bd — ad] et o J — 68 benigne pietatis Aaa — et ante palpebre add. Ad septem fere litteras ante palpebre eras. K — glorietur (?) J — ex exercitu celesti in celesti exercitu corr. K — 69 quia] qui Y A' o J Ab Za L" Bd Nb K (vide p. 54) — humi- (verbi humiliter) in ras. K2 — illel ipse Y A' o J Ab Za Lct 10;d (vide pp. 54 sq.) — tue et eternaliter omni] tue eternaliter omni Ab tue et eterno omni N" tue et eternaliter omni in ras. K2 tue et eternaliter cum J (vide pp. 55 sq. et 28) — 70 nares] aures (notam + in marg. habet) Ab — fectorem Za — pudedri Bd — lazari mortui J — fectorem Za — spiritualiter] specialiter o J — preciose om. Ab — eternaliter om. Nb eternaliter impendatur in ras. K2 (vide p. 28) — impendantur Bd — 71 tuo ore Gh — corporalem salutem et spiritualem Bd — fidei] vite Nb — 
 
 
 
 
 84 11. THE A TEXT verba vite et doctrine sepissime predicasti, ideo benedictum sit reue- rendum os tuum et labia tua pro omni verbo, quod ab eis processit. Amen. 72 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia dentibus tuis mundissimis ad sustentacionem tui benedicti corporis cibum corporalem moderatis- sime masticasti, ideo benedicantur et honorentur dentes tui ab omni- bus creaturis tuis. Amen. 73 (= C) Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia lingua tua numquam mouebatur ad loquendum neque silebat nisi iuste et vtiliter, quantum erat preordinatum in tua diuinitate, idcirco benedicta sit eadem lingua tua. Amen. 74 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia secundum tuam etatem barbam speciosam in tua facie decora decenter portasti, ideo sempiterne veneretur et adoretur barba tua venerabilis. Amen. 75 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, benedictum sit guttur tuum, stomachus ac viscera et omnia interiora tua sacra perpetuo honorentur pro eo, quod corpus tuum preciosum suo debito ordine decenter nutrierunt et vitam tuam corporalem perfecte sustentauerunt ad animarum redempcionem et leticiam angelorum. Amen. 76 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui digne ab omnibus appellaris dux, quia crucis onustam sarcinam tuis sanctis humeris et collo portasti, 76 crucis . . . portasti, Vulg. loh. 19,17; QO 50 reuerendum] venerandum o — os tuum reuerendum Ab — ex processerunt in processit corr. Ab — 72 § 72 post § 73 loc. La Bd (vide p. 42 sq.) — subse ante sustentacionem del. Bd — mastigasti Za La — tuis om. J Ab — 73 silebat] solebat Bd — preordinatum erat A" — idcirco benedicta sit] ideo sit benedicta Nb K (vide p. 28) — tua lingua K lingua om. J — 74 quia] qui Y o J Ab Za Lot Bd K ex qui in quia corr. (?) A' (vide p. 54) — etatem tuam La — decore o — ue ante ideo del. A' — veneretur sempiterne A' J — 75 ac] et La K — nutrierunt] ex intererunt in nutererunt (sic ?) corr. La — tuam vitam Ab — perfecte om. o J — sustentacionem et ante redempcionem add. A' — letitia Za — 76 quia] qui Y A' o J Ab Za La Bd Nb K (vide p. 54) — onustam] honestam o — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 72-79 85 antequam inferni portas potenter confringeres animasque electorum ad celos reduceres, idcirco tuo benedicto collo et humeris, qui talia sustinuerunt, sit honor et gloria eternaliter sine fine. Amen. 77 (= D) Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia benedictum cor tuum regale et magnificum numquam tormentis nec terroribus seu blandiciis flecti potuit a defensione regni tui veritatis et iusticie nec tuo sangui- ni dignissimo in aliquo pepercisti sed magnifico corde pro iusticia et lege fideliter decertasti legisque precepta et perfeccionis consilia amicis et inimicis tuis intrepide predicasti et pro defensione ipsorum cum tuis sanctis sequacibus moriendo in prelio victoriam obtinuisti, idcirco dignum est, vt inuictum cor tuum in celo et in terra semper magnificetur et a cunctis creaturis et militibus triumphali honore incessanter laudetur. Amen. 78 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, extrenui milites et fideles seruitores huius seculi vitam suam morti libenter exponunt in bello, vt eorum domini sue vite gaudeant sospitate, sed tu, o bone Domine mi, ad mortem crucis velociter festinasti, ne serui tui miserabiliter inter- irent. Propter quod iustum est, vt gloriosum et intrepidum pectus tuum a cunctis seruis tuis, quos taliter liberasti, et ab omnibus aliis eternaliter adoretur ac eciam ab angelicis choris humiliter collaude- tur. Amen. 79 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, quia venerandis manibus et brachiis tuis vires Sampsonis mirabiliter excessisti, dum ea ligno crucis affigi 76 inferni . . . reduceres, QO 57; 79; SA 18:21 79 vires Sampsonis, Vulg. iud. 14-16 constringeres Gh — tuorum post electorum add. K — gloria et honor A' — fine om. et in marg. suppl. A' — 77 (glia] qui A' o — con] corpus J — nec (ante terroribus)] et Aaa — terroribus] tortoribus o torporibus J — seu] nec La — sanguini tuo A' — tuis (ante intrepide) om. La Bd — cum] tamen (aut cum ?) K — obtinuit Ab — idcirco] ideo La — in celo et in terra om. A' — 78 stren(n)ui Y A' o J Ab za La Bd extrennui Gh K extremi Nb (vide p. 56) — suam om. I,' — libenter morti Y A" morti om. Bd — o tu La — ex interierent in interirent corr. Ab — est vt] et o J est et Ab — tuis seruis o J tuis om. Ab B d — et (ante ab) om. r — amen om. K — 79 quia conieci qui codd. (vide p. 54) — tuis om. Nb — sansonis Y Za Gh samsonis A' Bd sompsonis o — excecisti o excedisti Bd — 7 - Sten Eklund 
 
 
 
 
 86 11. THE 0 TEXT pacienter sustinuisti et sic ab inferno amicos tuos violenter rapuisti, idcirco eisdem membris tuis ab omnibus, quos redemisti, exhibeatur incessabilis reuerencia, laus eternaliter et gloria sempiterna. Amen. 80 (= E) Domine mi Ihesu Christe, benedicantur et honorentur in eternuet preciose coste tue et tergum tuum a cunctis hominibus spiritualibus et terrenis laboribus insudantibus pro eo, quod ab infancia tua vsque ad mortem pro redempcione nostra incessanter laborasti et peccata nostra cum magno onere et dolore tuo dorso portasti. Amen. 81 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, summa puritas et vera mundicia, benedicantur innocentissimi lumbi tui et laudentur super omnem angelicam mundiciam, que est in celo, et super omnium puritatem, qui castitatem et virginitatem seruauerunt in mundo, quia omnium castitas et virginitas tue mundicie et puritati nequeunt comparari. Amen. 82 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, reuereantur et humiliter honorentur ab omnibus creaturis celi et terre genua tua cum poplitibus et tibiis tuis super omnes, qui coram dominis et magistris suis genua flectendo reuerenciam exhibent et honorem, quia tu, Dominus omnium, ante discipulos tuos genua flectebas cum omni humilitate. Amen. 83 Domine mi Ihesu Christe, magister bone, benedicantur et perhen- niter adorentur pedes tui beatissimi, quia cum magno dolore tuo per asperiorem viam, quam alios docuisti, tu in hoc mundo discalciatis 79 ab inferno . . . rapuisti, QO 57; 75; SA 18:21 tuos om. A' — tuis membris Y A" Za tuis om. Ab (vide p. 4325) — 80 spiritualiter o — eo om. Bd — — ex opere in onere corr. Abl — 81 tui lumbi Bd — super (post et) incessanter] indesinenter om. J — omnium (ante puritatem)] omnem Ab — 82 reuereantur] venerentur Gh (cf. § 91) — renouentur ante honorentur del. Ab — et tibiis om. o — omnes] omnibus A" — ex quia in qui corr. Za — 83 beatissimi om. Aaa — sanctissimi et beatissimi Y L" Bd — tuo om. Nb K1 (supra lin. suppl. K2) (vide p. 28) — per] semper Za — tu om. Ab — discalceatis K — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 80-83 87 pedibus ambulasti et in fine pro nobis eos duris clauis cruci affigi permisisti, qui viuis et regnas cum Deo Patre in vnitate Spiritus Sancti per omnia secula seculorum. Amen. et . . . permisisti om. et in marg. suppl. Y — et (ante in fine)] sed Nb — finem Y A" Za Gh — in vnitate . . . sancti] et spiritu sancto in vnitate Ab — deus ante per add. Akaa (cf. § 103) — per . . . amen] per etc K — amen om. J 
 
 
 
 
 88 11. THE A TEXT 84 In ista oracione, que diuinitus fuit reuelata beate Birgitte, deuotis- sime et pulcre laudantur omnia membra gloriosi corporis Virginis Marie et virtuosi actus eius corporales. Oracio IV. 85 (= A) 0 Domina mea, vita mea, regina celi, mater Dei, quamuis ego certa sum, quod tuum corpus gloriosum a tota celesti curia cum canore iubilo incessanter laudatur in cells, tamen ego, licet indigna persona sim, toto corde meo desidero omnibus tuis membris precio- sis laudes et gracias, quas valeo, reddere in terris. 86 Idcirco, o domina mea Virgo Maria, laudetur cesaries tua cum capillis tuis dyademate glorie decorata, quia solis iubare clariores sunt. Nam sicut crines capitis computari nequeunt, ita virtutes tue innumerabiles existunt. 87 0 domina mea Virgo Maria, frons et facies tua honestissima super lune albedinem collaudentur, quia nullus fidelis in hoc tenebroso mundo te aspiciebat, qui non aliquam consolacionem spiritualem a tua visione sibi infundi senciebat. 88 Benedicta sis tu, domina mea Virgo Maria, cuius supercilia cum palpebris claritatis nitore radios sotares excedunt. 89 Benedicti sint oculi tut pudicissimi, o domina mea Virgo Maria, qui nichil concupiebant de rebus transitoriis, quas in hoc mundo 85, cf. QO 64 Codices adhibiti: §§ 84-103: Y Aaa o J Ab Za Gh N" K 84 autem subsequenti ante oracione add. Nb — beate] domine K — brigide Y A' o J Ab Za byrgitte Nb — omnia] oiuo (?) J — actus bis Ab — etc post corporales add. Y Za — oracio IV om. A aa 0 j Ab Za Nb oracio K (vide pp. 39 sq.) — 85 o om. A' — vita mea om. o — mea (post Y vita) om. Kl supra lin. suppl. K2 — et ante mater add. Nb K (vide p. 28) — ego certa sum] ego certa in ras. K2 sum supra lin. K2 ego certus (certus in ras. ?) sum Nb ego certa sim A' ego certa suam o — tuum corpus gloriosum] totum corpus tuum gloriosum o J totum corpus gloriosum Ab ex tuum gloriosum corpus in tuum corpus gloriosum corr. Nb — et ante iubilo add. o J — laudetur Y A' Za — sim] sum J — 86 tua om. o J (vide pp. 31 et 56) — tuis om. Nb K (vide pp. 28 et 56) — nequiunt J — tue (?) in lin. Abl tue supra lin. add. Abe — 87 fronns (sic ?) Ab — altedinem Ab — aspiciebat te A' — qui] quim (sic !) Za — 89 ex benedicta in benedicti corr. Nb — pudentissimi J — cupiebant Aaa Ab — hoc om. o — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 84-93 89 videbant, quia, quocienscumque oculos tuos leuabas, eorum aspec- tus stellarum excellebat nitorem coram tota celesti curia. 90 (= B) 0 domina mea Virgo Maria, collaudentur maxille tue beatissime super aurore pulcritudinem, que pulcerrime cum colore rubeo et candido exoritur. Sic et maxille tue speciose, dum in hoc mundo fuisti, coram Deo et angelis claritatis nitore fulgebant, quia illas numquam pro mundana pompa vel vana gloria ostendisti. 91 0 domina mea Virgo Maria, reuereantur et honorentur aures tue honestissime super omnes vires maris et omnium aquarum motum, quia contra omnem fluxum immundicie mundani auditus semper ipse aures tue viriliter militabant. 92 0 Virgo Maria dominatrix mea, glorietur nasus tuus suauissimus, qui ex virtute Spiritus Sancti numquam anhelitum attraxit vel emisit, quin tota cogitacio tua semper esset apud Altissimum. Et quamuis aliquando dormiebas, voluntatem tamen tuam ab eo numquam mu- tabas. Sit igitur semper odor suauitatis, laudis et honoris eidem naso tuo cum naribus tuis beatissimis super commixtionem odoriferam omnium aromatum et omnium herbarum, que delectabilem fragran- ciam de se solent emittere. 93 (= C) 0 domina mea Virgo Maria, laudetur lingua tua Deo et angelis gratissima super omnes arbores fructiferas. Nam omne ver- bum, quod lingua tua protulit, nulli persone vmquam nocuit sed in alicuius commodum semper venit. Erat enim ipsa lingua tua pruden- tissima omnibus dulcior ad audiendum, quam aliquis dulcissimus fructus ad gustandum. excellebat] excedebant A' — coram bis J — curia celesti Ab — 90 ex deum in dum supra lin. corr. Ab — coram om. o — illas . . . gloria] per illas numquam mundanam gloriam o — 91 reuereantur] venerentur Gh (cf. § 82) — maris om. J — mundani auditus] munda inauditis o — 92 anelitum o J hanelitum Y A' Za (vide p. 40) — semper om. Nb — ex ididem (?) in eidem in marg. corr. N" — flagranciam Y Za ex fragranciam in flagranciam supra lin. corr. Ab — 93 ex fructiferos in fructiferas supra lin. corr. Y — tua lingua Y Za — 
 
 
 
 
 90 11. THE Å TEXT 94 0 regina et domina mea Virgo Maria, laudetur os tuum benedic- tum cum labiis tuis super rosarum et omnium forum amenitatem et specialiter pro illo tuo benedicto verbo humilimo, quod eodem ore tuo precioso angelo Dei respondisti, quando ipse Deus suam volun- tatem, quam per prophetas predixerat, per te in mundo voluit adim- plere. Cuius virtute potenciam demonum in inferno diminuisti et angelorum choros in celo honorifice restaurasti. 95 0 Virgo Maria domina mea et consolacio mea, honoretur perpe- tuo collum tuum cum humeris tuis et tergo tuo super omnium liliorum venustatem, quia numquam dicta membra tua inclinasti nisi propter aliquid vtile vel honoris Dei nec eciam erexisti. Nam sicut lilium ad flatum ventorum motum facit et inclinacionem, ita omnia membra tua mouebantur ad Spiritus Sancti infusionem. 96 (= D) 0 domina mea, virtus mea et dulcedo mea, benedicantur brachia tua sanctissima cum manibus et digitis tuis et eternaliter honorentur super omnes gemmas preciosas, que tuis virtuosis operi- bus comparantur, quia, sicut virtuosa opera tua Filium Dei ad te alliciebant, sic et brachia et manus tue ipsum materno amoris am- plexu dulciter stringebant. 97 0 domina mea et illuminacio mea, benedicta sint vbera tua sacratissima super omnes dulcissimos fontes aquarum, quia, sicut aqua ipsorum scaturiens prebet solamen et sicientibus refeccionem, 94 angelo . . . adimplere, Vulg. Luc. 1,26-38 95 aliquid vtile vel honoris Dei, cf. Rev. II 25 B-C 94 specialiter] spiritualiter Za — benedicto verbo tuo K — quod] quo Ab — tuo om. A"' - ex voluntantem in voluntatem corr. Za — per prophetas] prophetis o J — honorifice om. Ab — 95 o virgo . . . collum in ras. K2 tuum (post collum) in marg. K2 — domina mea virgo maria Ab — q ante maria del. A' — mea (post domina) om. Gh — et (ante consolacio) om. Nb — et consolacio mea om. A' — perpetue Gh — liliorum] liberorum o foliorum J — tua om. Za — aliquod Nb — honorem A' o J (vide p. 57) — nisi propter aliquid vtile vel honorem dei post erexisti add. (haec verba suo quoque loco habet) o — tua membra mouebantur A' tua membra semper mouebantur Y o J Ab Za (vide pp. 25 sqq. et 57) — missionem ante infusionem del. Ab — 96 virgo maria ante virtus add. o J Ab — mea (post virtus) om. o — tua om. o — et (ante manus) om. A' — ipsum om. o J — amo ante amoris del. Nb — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 94-100 91 sic tua sacra vbera Filium Dei lactando prebuerunt nobis indigenti- bus medicinam et consolacionem. 98 0 domina mea Virgo Maria, benedictum sit pectus tuum precio- sum super aurum purissimum, quia, quando sub cruce filii tui tota dolorosa stetisti, tunc gloriosum pectus tuum ex sonitu malleorum quasi in duro prelo acerrime stringi sensisti. Et quamuis filium tuum cordialiter diligebas, maluisti tamen illam penam amarissimam susti- nere, vt scilicet ipse pro animabus redimendis moreretur, quam quod ipsis perditis mors illa ab eo euitaretur. Et sic tu in virtute constancie firmissima perstitisti, quando in omni aduersitate voluntati diuine te totaliter conformasti. 99 (= E) 0 domina mea, leticia cordis mei, Virgo Maria, glorificetur et veneretur cor tuum reuerendissimum, quod ad Dei amorem et honorem ita ardentissimum erat super omnes creaturas celi et terre, quod flamma caritatis eius in celorum celsitudinem ad Deum Patrem conscendit, propter quod Dei Filius a Patre cum Spiritus Sancti feruore in vterum tuum gloriosum descendit, qui tamen a Patre separatus non extitit, quamuis secundum Dei preordinacionem in tuis virgineis visceribus humanatus honestissime fuit. 100 0 domina mea fecundissima et virginissima Virgo Maria, Bene- dictus sit venter tuus beatissimus super omnes agros fructifere germi- nantes, quia, sicut semen, quod cecidit in terram bonam, de se fructum affert possessori centesimum, sic venter tuus virgo et fecun- 97 sacra] sancta Aaa — dei filium J — prebe ante prebuerunt del. Ab — consolamen A' — 98 mea om. o — octo fere litteras ante malleorum eras. Za — sensisti] fecisti stetisti in lin. eras. et sensisti in marg. suppl. Ab — duodecim fere litteras ante filium eras. Za — moriretur Y Za — quam quod] quam pro Y Za quod om. Aaa ex quam pro in quam corr. (?) Ab (OSB 81 en at) — ab eo om. Nb — virtute] veritate Za — firmissime N" firmissime (?) K1 firmissima K2 (vide p. 28) — perstetisti o J — voluntate ante adversitate del. (voluntate suo quoque loco habet) Y — 99 leticia cordis mei om. Ab — veneretur] reueretur o — honorem et amorem o J Ab amorem et om. Gh (OSB 82 . . .for thy at thz var til gudh brxnnande madh kxrlek) — eius om. Za — ascendit A' — gloriosam post secundum add. o — 100 mea in marg. K2 fecundissima et virginissima virgo maria in ras. K2 — virgo maria ante fecundissima loc. Ab — venter (post sit)] ventus J — fructiferos o — de] et o — affert] facit et affert Ab affert om. et reddit post centesimum add. o — ex centesimo in centesimum corr. Ab — virgo et fecundissi- mus] virgo fecundissimus o J K virgo maria fecundissimus Ab et ante fecundissimus habet sed, ut videtur, del. Za (vide pp. 57 sq.) — 
 
 
 
 
 92 11. THE A TEXT dissimus benedictum fructum Deo Patri attulit plusquam millesi- mum. Et sicut ex fertili habundancia fructus agri dominus gloriatur ac eciam auicule et animalia delectanter pascuntur, sic ex benedicto fructu fertilis agelli ventris tui summe Deus in celo honoratur, angeli gratulantur et homines in terra largiflue sustentantur et viuunt. 101 (= F) 0 domina mea Virgo prudentissima laudentur eternaliter pedes tui sacratissimi super omnes radices incessanter fructum affe- rentes. Sic itaque sint pedes tui benedicti, qui Dei Filium gloriosum, fructum dulcissimum, in tuo corpore portabant inclusum, tuo cor- pore incorrupto existente et virginitate tua illesa semper perma- nente. 0 quam honeste incedebant pedes tui sacratissimi! Vere de quolibet eorum vestigio Rex celestis consolatus extitit et tota curia celica gauisa et iocundissima fuit. 102 0 domina mea Virgo Maria, mater omnium, Deus Pater simul cum Filio et Spiritu Sancto in sua incomprehensibili maiestate eter- naliter collaudetur pro cella illa sacratissima tocius corporis tui, in quo Dei Filius suauissime requieuit, quem totus angelorum exercitus collaudat et in celis totaque ecclesia veneranter adorat in terris. 103 0 tu eciam Domine meus, Rex meus et Deus meus, sit tibi perpetuus honor, perhennis laus, benediccio et gloria cum infinita graciarum accione, qui fillam tam dignissimam et honestissimam Virginem creasti et eam tibi in matrem tuam elegisti pro omnibus, qui in celo et in terra quomodolibet consolati fuerunt, atque pro hiis, qui in purgatorio per eam adiutorium et solamen habuerunt, qui viuis et regnas cum Deo Patre in vnitate Spiritus Sancti Deus per omnia secula seculorum. Amen. benedicum Gh — i post fertili del. Y — delectanter] delectantur ac o delectantur et J (vide p. 34) — fructui (?) J — fertili Y Za Gh — largiflue] largissime o — 101 sacratissimi] sanctissimi A — duas litteras ante radices del. Nb — itaque] vtique Nb — dulcissimum fructum K — portabant . . . corpore om. et in marg. suppl. Ab — quolicet (?) A" Ab — celica] celi et o — 102 maria] et o — illa om. o — quo] qua A" Ab — ex extercitus in exercitus corr. Ab — veneranter] venerantur et A' — 103 et deus meus om. o J — deus] dominus Za — ex honestissimam et dignissimam in dignissimam et honestissimam corr. K — tuam om. A" — sex fere litteras ante quomodolibet eras. K — omnibus ante hiis add. A" — et leuamen ante et solamen add. J — qui viuis et regnas . . . seculorum] qui viuis et regnas cum deo patre in vnitate spiritus sancti per omnia secula seculorum Y Aaa Ab Za qui viuis et regnas cum patre et spiritu sancto deus in secula seculorum o J qui viuis etc K (cf. § 83) — amen om. K 
 
 
 
 
 THE OSB (A) TEXT 1 thxsse Nine varo sancte birgitto af thxm hxlgha anda kxnde oc bewiste Oc ae sidhen hwan dagh plxghade hon tham [hwar dagh] lxse mz myklom gudhelich. BÖN TILL KRISTI PINA OCH DÖD 2 MJn sOte gudh nere vare thik thar xr een gudh j trem parsonis fadher ok son oc thcen halghe ande. 3 iEre vare thic min harre jhesus christus gudhz son thar sandis af fadhrenom j enna jomfrw likama ok var ey thy sidher j hannom j hymmerike Ok han j thik j jorderike madh synom guddom j thynom mandom. 4 HEdher hafue thu min harre jhesus christus thar j jomfrwna quidh vaxste oc dualdis til than tyme kom at thu af hanne foddis Oc vardoghadis af hanne handom hannas Oc j klxdhe swepas oc j jxtw lxggias oc af hanne molk framfostras. 5 LOf hafue thw min harre jhesus christus thar lxt thik omskxre Oc jhesum kalla oc konnvnga til thin ath komme oc thar xfter j monster offra. 6 iEre vari thik myn harre jhesus christus thar vnder gomo oc lydhno thin foosterfadhers Oc thyna modher var madhen thin likame vaxste thar thxm badhen vnder thyne gomo oc lydhno hafdhe. Codex adhibitus: §§ 1-24: OSB (§ 14: OSG) 1 a ante anda del. OSB — hwan dagh plxghade hon thaem hwar dagh OSB — litteram g ante myklom habet OSB — 4 af (post thu) om. et in marg. suppl. OSB — 
 
 
 
 
 94 12. THE OSB (A) TEXT 7 HEdher hafue thw min harre jhesus christus thar vilde af thynom thieenisto manne döpas Oc sixlfuer jxrthekne ora Oc predika Oc thz mz ska1wm opinbara ath thw vast sander gudh oc vilde prophete oordh fulkompne Oc madh thynom clodh mxniskio sixla aterlosa. 8 Lof hafue thu min harre jhesus christus thar fastadhe swo at thik hwngradhe Oc vilde af thynom owen diaglenom thola frestilse Ok mz eno oordhe tha thw vilde han fran thik koordhe. 9 HEdher hafue thu min heerra jhesus christus thar thin dodh fore sagdhe Oc j sidherste natwordenom thin dyre likame af brodhe vigdhe Oc gaf han thynom apostlom oc keenneswennom til amynne Oc thxr xfter there foter mz othmiykt twadhe. 10 IERa vare thik myn harre jhesus christus thar af dothzens radde ij thyne bOn swettis blodhe Oc tho giorde thu xfter thy thw sialfwir vilde Ok thin karlek for thyno handa varke vppinbaradhe. // LOf hafue thu myn harre jhesus christus thar kOptis oc saldis Oc thar xfter fongadhis Oc madh Eno oorde thyna Owynni til jordhena fx1de Oc sidhan thik sialfuan j thera hxnder antwordadhe. 12 HEdher hafue thu min harra jhesus christus thar til Cayphas hws leddis Oc fore pylati doom antwordadhis oc til herodem sandis Oc af hannom ok hans harskapi haddis oc gabbadis Oc sidhen ater mz spot oc hadh till pylatum leddis. 13 iEro hafue thu myn harre jhesus christus thar fore spot skuld j purpura klxdhe fordhis oc thit hofwt madh thorn kronadhis Oc thit xntlite af there =inom spottadhis thin oghon huldos oc thyna kinder oc hals sloghos. 8 diaeflenon ante dixflenorn del. OSB — 10 litteram t ante thxr del. OSB — 
 
 
 
 
 95 §§ 7-20 14 <Lof haui thu min herra ihesus christus ther vidh studh domdis bindas ok hudhstrykas ok epte pylati budhi blodhogher synas til at iudha gryma härdzska skulde blidhcas.> 15 HEdher hafue thw min hxrre jhesus christus thwr ater fore pylati doom leddis oc horde hwru lOgn a thik kxrdhis Oc af allo folkino espas r0fuarin gifua lusan oc thik h2erra min korsfaesta. 16 IERe vare thik min hxrre jhesus christus thar blodhoper til dodhin domdis kors a thine signadha axla lagdis Oc tha thw j pyno stadhin kom sixlfuer thik afklaxIde Oc nakin vidh korssit fxstis. 17 HEdher hafue thu myn ha rra jhesus christus thar loot thina hxnder oc fester mz reepe wtdraghas Oc mz jxrn naglom gynom stingas oc mz hambrom saman slaas oc hordhe thik swikara oc forradhara kallas Oc fore spot titulum oc taflona ofuer thit hofwth skrifues. 18 LOf hafue thu myn ha rra jhesus christus fore ath thins likama Oghna syn myrktos af vanm2egne xntlitith bliknadhe af blodhzens minskilse twngan thorkadhis af in xlfuana drowilsom mwnnen vettes af beskom drykke af hofwdh saromen Skxggit ok haarith mxdh blodhe thioknadhe Oc allir thin likame var swa hwdhstrukin at hwdhin var all af thornom swnder rifwin Swa stodh thu a korsseno oc bidde dodhin aldhra kxreste hxrre myn. 19 /6ERo hafue thw min ha2rra jhesus christus thar i tholke nodh thyna modher skodhadhe thar aldre syndadhe Oc hona j thins thixnisto manz orne antwordadhe Swo ok fore ath thu syndoghom swaradhe tha thu miskund mz rofuarenom giordhe. 20 HEdher hafue thu min ha rra jhesus christus for hwarn thxn ridh thu a korsseno tholde tha vxrkin af hwarie sareno til hiartat lagde oc thu thyn ande j thins fadhers hxnder antwordhadhe. 14 § 14 om. OSB, cf. Lof blidhcas OSG 
 
 
 
 
 96 12. THE OSB (A) TEXT 21 LOf hafue thu myn hazrre jhesus christus fore at thit hixrte aff otholikom vxrk clOdhe hofwdhit fiol af brystet oc allir likamen kolnadhe Oc ~her a trxno hamgde Oc ij samo stundenne alla thyna vinni thokt vt af hx1fuite Oc for allom thz hafdhe forskullat ypnadhe thu hymmerike. 22 HEdher hafue thw min hxrra jhesus christus fore at thin sidhe ypnadhis til at hixrtat j brysteno skulle gynom stingas Ey vilde oc thu ath thin clOdhe likame fOrre af korsseno thokis xn thxr til loff gafuis. 23 iEre vare thik myn hxrre jhesus fore ath thyne vinni thoko thin likama af korsseno dodhan oc j klxdhe swepto allan blodughan oc j jordh lagdis Oc thaer af pylati riddarom oc thixnarom gomdis. 24 LOf hafue thw myn hxrra jhesus christus thxr opstodh a paska dagh lifuandis oc teedhis thxm thw vilde Oc foor a hxlgha thorsdagh til thit rike swo at thz alle sagho thxr nxr thik varo. Oc a pingitz dagha dagh thin hxlgha anda thynom vennom seende Oc giorde thxm til thin kxrlek brxnnande Oc siter Nw j thin guddoms aero mxdh allom lymmom lifuande som thw thokt af jomfrwne oc skal ater a domadagh komma Oc alla mxniskio xfter synom gxrnyngom doma. 
 
 
 
 
 97 §§ 21-32 BÖN TILL KRISTI LEKAMEN 25 MJn harre jhesus christus tho at hwaro at jak veet at thin likame xras j hwarie stundynne mz hymmerikis sange ey thy sidher til dirfwis jak osnixl parsona ath sighia hannom lof mz mynom syndo- gha mvnne. 26 Min harre jhesus hOgheste prxster thar thin likamma fOrst af brodhe vigde vari thins likama sate j hoghestom hether nast thynom fadher j thynom guddome. 27 Min harre jhesus christus fore ath alla thyna gxrnynga af mestom karlek gOras thy thit hofwth och haar mz keysarlike krono xris oc alt thz skapat xr vnder thit vold skal boghias. 28 Min harre jhesus christus af konnvngxlike xxt lofuis thit xnne thy at thz sigh aldrig fran sannynd vxnde. 29 Min harre jhesus christus thina bryne oc bra oc oghon af allo hymmerikis harskapi xrins thy at the blidhelika see til alla the thcer mz karlek miskund bedhas. 30 Min harre jhesus christus thin Oron Ewardelikin hedher horin thar engen forsmadhe at hOre thxn som til thin taladho. 31 Min harre jhesus christus xrins thyna nasa thar ey stygdes for vor helso skuld vidher lazari rwthna likama Oc ey vith tham fwle duon thcer af judasse forradhara gik andelika. 32 Min harre jhesus Signadher vari thin mwnder fore hwart thz ordh thu taladhe thy at thz var alt til siala ok likama tharue Oc till the halgho troo opinbarilse. Codex adhibitus: §§ 25-45: OSB 
 
 
 
 
 98 12. THE OSB (A) TEXT 33 Min herra jhesus christus thyna tender xrins for hwart thz sin the vplxtos oc saman bitos tha thu mat mz tham tuggadhe thar all thing skapadhe. 34 Min herre jhesu christe thin twnga hogste lof hafue thy at hon aldre rordis alla stadnadhe ytan apter thy thar fore seet var j thynom guddome. 35 Min herre jhesus christus thin swalghiande och maghi lifuer oc lwnga madh al annor jnalfue Ewcerdelikin hedher hafue for allan mat ok dryk the swolgho oc smalto thynom likama til styrkilse oc sialom til Ewcerdeligh vedherqueghilse. 36 Min herre jhesus christus signadha vardhin thyna kinder oc haka thar thu lat skxg a vaxa xfter thynom aldre Om the mato vaxste som thu for skapadhe adame mz eno oordhe. 37 Min herra jhesus christus thcer kallas hartoghe aero hafue thin dyre hals thar thwnga byrdhe bar fOr en thu vant hxluite oc wtual- dan skara til hymmerikis ledde. 38 Min herre jhesus christus all creatwr af riddarlikom hether thit hiarte nere timer ey for lokkan alla for thrugan for thin rikis rat spardhe thik sialfuan thxn rat thin vili var ytan vphof ath thw vilde man vordha oc logh kanna For laghin striddo alle martires Oc vnder tham bindas mz eede alle the som riddere giras. 39 Min herre jhesus christus thit bryst hedher hafua ofuer alla trolika thianara the thar sit lif hafua osport til thas at there herre moghe lifua. herre myn thw lopt vtj dodhin thar til at lifua skulle swennen. 34 Min scripsi Oin OSB — 39 Min herra jhesus christus lof hafwin thyna hinder ofuer oc arma (cf. § 40) ante Min herre jhesus christus thit bryst del. OSB — 39 unam litteram ante bryst del. OSB — osport] ospart malim — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 33-45 99 40 Min harre jhesus christus lof hafwin thyna Imender Oc arma ofuer samson starka oc alla andra kampa thy at the wonno halwite tha the varo vidh tr2eit fasta Oc thoko wt w thy mz makt alla thyna vinni. 41 Min harra jhesus christus hedher hafuin thyna axla oc rygger mz rifuiom ofuer alla the som jordhena yrkia Oc gudhelikit arfuodha gira thy at the hafdho arfuodhe fran fOzlotymanom Oc til thin clodh for siala tharue. 42 Min harre jhesus christus signadh vordhe thin land Oc lof hafue ofuer angla renlek j hymmerike ok ofuer alla tham som renlek hafua haldhet j jordherike. 43 Min harre jhesus christus thin been ok kna hedher hafuin for alla the timer Nymma ath hedher gOre synom mastarom thy at the bogdos mz othmiykt for thynom k2enneswenom. 44 Min harre jhesus christus thyne foter lofuins ofuer alla the thar mastere snille fingo thy at the gingo hardhare vag an the androm kxndo. 45 Min harra jhesus christus gkedhi hether ok ara vordhe allom thynom halgha likama fran thynom jassa oc vnder thyna ylia thar fore nmenniskiom synis j brOtz liknilse Oc synis mz allom lymmom lifuande for allo hymmerikis harskapi. 43 kanneswenom om. et in marg. suppl. OSB 
 
 
 
 
 100 12. THE OSB (A) TEXT BÖN TILL JUNGFRU MARIA 46 SJgnadh vordhe thw myn jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher thy at jngen som thu sin skapara swa mOket xlskade for thy amt thu the baste Creatwre thar gudh skapadhe. 47 Hedher hafue thu myn jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher thxr madh angle fadher ok modher budhadis Oc af thy dyrasta hionala- ghi thar nokon tyma vordh thin likame afladhis Oc som annor barn af modher lifue fOddis. 48 LOff hafue thu min jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher thy at ginstan thw af spyna vandis af forxidrom j monstrom offradhis Oc vnder gudhelix biskops gomo madh androm jomfrwom antworda- dhis. 49 /Era vari thik myn jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher thar fore at tha thw til thin alder kom oc forstodh at gudh var thin skapare thw han ginstan ofuer all thing alskadhe Oc alla tyma dagh oc nat thw markte oc alla til hans thianist thw nytiadhe oc gaft thynom likama sompn och mat xpte thy han matte bast standa j gudheliko arfuode. 50 HEdher hafue thw myn jomfrw sancta maria thar thin jomfrudom gudhi sialfuom lofuadhe thy gaft thw thar jnkte om hwar thik fxste thy at thu hafde androm trolofuat thik for allom starkare oc bortre . 51 LOf hafue thu min jomfrw sancta maria thar stod ensamen mz allom thynom kraftom tha thw thyn tro lofuadhe harre gudh tha thankte xngelin til thik kom Ok hans hedhers villi thik kungiordhe oc sagde Ok ginstan thu madh othmiykt jakadhe Oc than halge Codex adhibitus: §§ 46-68: OSB 46 xlskare ante xlskade del. OSB — 48 vnder om. et in marg. suppl. OSB — 49 xmbite ante xrfuode del. OSB — 50 HEdher hafue thu min jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher thar mz xngle fadher oc modher budhadis Oc af thy (vide § 47) ante HEdher hafue thw del. OSB — 51 thxnkte om. et in marg. suppl. OSB — til om. et in marg. suppl. OSB — thu (post Ok ginstan) om. et in marg. suppl. OSB — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 46-57 101 ande thik mz alle dygd fylte Oc gudh fadher thik sin son sxnde ok han thok likama af thyno koti ok blodhe Ok vardh gudhz son thin son ginstan mz allom lymmom lifuande mxdh sin guddoms valde. 52 'Era vare thik myn jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher thxr kxnde j thik at gudhz likame vagste Oc rordhes til thxn tyme kom at han af thik foddis Oc var thu the furste pxrsone thxr gudhz likame hannadhe oc han j klxdhe swepte Oc j jxtw lagdhe Oc mz thyne melk hans likame opfostradhe. 53 HEdher hafue thu myn jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher thxr j stallit saa konnvnga komma Oc thynom son mxdh hedher konnvngx- lika gafuo fira Oc timer xfter thu sixlf han j monster offradhe Oc j thino hixrto gomde alt thz som taladhis oc giordis j hans barndome. 54 LOf hafue thu myn jomfrw sancta maria thxr mz barneno thy dyrasta til Egiptaland rymde Oc sidhan han til nazareth ater fOrdhe Oc vnder thyne lydhno oc sins fooster fadhers hans likame vagxste. 55 'Era vari thik myn j omfrw sancta maria thxr saa thyn son predika ok ja2rthekne gora ok kamnesuena til sigh kalla Ok apostolos vt- ux<lia> the hannom skullo vitne bxre ath han var gudhz son ok vilde propheta ordh fulkompna oc xpter thom pyno ok dOdh thola. 56 HEdher vare thik myn jomfru sancta maria thxr viste thin son fongin Oc sa hwru han var bwndin och hwdhstrukin Ok mz thorne kronader oc forradhare kalladher oc af allom forsmodher Oc saa han mxdh naglom vidh korsit frnstan lifuande ok naknan. 57 LOf vari thik min jomfrw maria gudhz modher thxr hordhe hwru han til thik taladhe Ok hwru han j dodhzens nodh till sin fadher opte Oc sin anda j hans hxnder antwordadhe. 55 vtuxlia scripsi vtuze in fine lineae OSB — 8 - Sten Eklund 
 
 
 
 
 102 12. THE OSB (A) TEXT 58 HEdher vari thik myn jomfru sancta maria thar saa thin son dodhan a korsseno hangia Ok fran jxssa oc til ylia allan blodughan Oc gynom hander ok foter ok bryst stungen Oc aller likamen af thornom sunder rifuyn. 59 "Era vari thik myn jomfrw sancta maria thar sa thin son af korsseno thakas Ok j kleedhe swepas Ok j graff laggias Oc af pylati riddarom oc thianarom gomas. 60 HEdher vari thik myn jomfrw sancta maria thar af modherlikom karlek ok aff hiartelighe sorgh mod widh thin sons graf skildis Oc af hans thianisto folke til johannis ewangeliste hws leddis Oc thz var thin trust Oc vidherqueghilse at thw viste fulkomlika hans vpstondel- se. 61 LOf vari thik min jomfrw sancta maria for at j thom sama pwnktenom thin son op af dodhe stodh thik thz sialfuer kwnnokt giordhe Oc thar xfter tedhis han thcem han vilde Ok mz Axiom bewiste ath thz var than same likamen som dodhin tholde. 62 HEdher vari thik myn jomfrw Sancta maria thar saa thin son aa hxlgha thorsdagh fara till sit rike suo ath thz alle sagho som thar nar varo Oc a pingitz dagha dagh sin halghe anda sxnde Than sama som thu var Nine fylt mz Oc giorde alla tham han fingo till sin karlek brxnnande. 63 'ERa vari thik myn jomfrw sancta maria fore at thin son lxt thik har nokor stund oc aar efter segh vara til thees at hans vinni skullo glxdhi ok hugnadh af thik hafua Ok radh thaka Swa ok at monge Otalike judha Ok hedhnynga af thy at the thin hofwisko laat sagho Ok snialla oordh hOrdho Ok dygdelika gxrnynga forstodho trodhe thz fullelika at thw var modher mz jomfrwdom oc thin son gudh mz mandom. 60 ewangeliste om. et in marg. suppl. OSB — 62 ligheme ante anda del. OSB — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 58-68 103 64 LOF vari thik myn jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher thar af modherlikom karlek j hwarie stundenne till thin son langadhe Tho vilde thu gxrne swa lxnge har lifua som hannom thaktis Ok af thy hogdis thin xra j hans rike. 65 HEdher vare thik min jomfrw sancta maria for at angelin thik sagde at thu skulde vidh varldena skilias Ok thin sixl af gudhi xras ok thin ligheme af apostlom jordhas. 66 iERa vari thik myn jomfrw sancta maria fore at j clOdhenom sialfuer guddomen thyna sigel vmfxmpnadhe Ok hona for allom drowilsom gomde gudh fadher thik thar hans son fodde alt thz skapat ger vnder thit vold lagde gudhz son thik syna modher mest segh sialfuom sate skipadhe gudh thxn halghe ande thyna sixl syna trolofuadhe jomfrw mz hoghestom hether hemfordhe. 67 LOf vari thik myn jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher fore at thin likame ~her klxddis Oc af apostlom j joordh lagdis Ok thar nokra stund dualdis til than tyme kom at han af gudhz valde till sialynna fordhis. 68 HEdher vari thik myn jomfrw sancta maria fore thz thin likama tha saa ok kande tha han after ~hin lifnadhe han saa sin son vara gudh mz mandom han kande j segh vare modher mz jomfrwdom han saa sin son vara ratwisona domara Tha kande han j segh hwatzske hafua syndat clOdhelika alle nadhelighe han sa sin son vara godhgar- nynga aterlonara han kande j segh alt thz got hafua giort som rxtwisone burdhe hedher ok lon fore gora han saa j ratwisone at thxn domdes gudhi nast som han hafdhe karest tha kande han j segh at engen karleker sin gudh swa karan hafdhe som han j anglom ok mannyskiom thy burdhe hannom mest gudhi hogeste sate epter hans tillate. 66 thit] ex hans in thit in marg. corr. OSB — t ante trolofuadhe del. OSB — 67 at thu af hanne foddis ante at han del. OSB — 68 giort ante giort del. OSB 
 
 
 
 
 104 12. THE OSB (A) TEXT BÖN TILL JUNGFRU MARIE LEMMAR 69 MJn jomfrw maria af the hxlghe trefallelikhet thu lofuis thy at thu xst the bxste Creatwra thxr nokon tyma skapadhis thu xst thorfto- gha sixla nodha gifuare Oc for vslom syndarom som nadhe bedhas test thu aldhra hullaste dagtingare all Creatwr lofwin gudh som thik skapadhe Oc thik til syna keysarynno kronadhe. 70 Min jomfrw maria lofuis thit haar ofwer [lofwis ofwer] lylio fxgrind thy at thz var skxrare solynne for thy at sua som haarit xr ytan tal sua xrw ok thyna dygdhe. 71 Min jomfrw maria ofuer monans hwitlek sken thit xntlite ok xnne thy lofuis thz ok teris thy at engen var than j thxsse myrko va rldinne thxr thik saa ath han xx nokot got af thyne syn j sigh sixlfuom kxnde. 72 Min jomfrw maria thyne bryne oc braa xrw thyne hare lika j fxgryndenne ofuir soolgijsla a2rw the skinande. 73 Min jomfrw maria thyn oghon jnkte girnadhos at xgha af forgang- likom thyngom som the sagho j theesse forganglike vxrld for thy huar thxn blink the gira xr ofuer stixrno fxgrynd for allo hymmerikis hxrskapi. 74 Min jomfru maria thyna kinder thu aldre fore bxlde thede thy lofuins the ofuer dagrandynna fxgrynd tim- stundom synas mz vx- nasto fxrgho hwite oc rode. 75 Min jomfru maria lof hafuin thyn oxron ofuer hafsins krafte Oc alla vatna rorilse thy at the stodho moot alla orena vxrldz thynga j nflytilsom . Codex adhibitus: §§ 69-87: OSB 70 lofuis thit haar ofwer lofwis ofwer OSB — 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 69-81 105 76 Min jomfrw maria aero hafuin thin nasa af thaes hxlgha anda fylle thy at thu aldhre swo anden jndrogh alla vtgaf at nokon tyma gik gudh af thynom mwnne sen thot hwaro at thu stundom soft tho var vilin sea than sami thy xrins the ofwer allo aromata tamprilse Oc ofuer al the yrte som gifue af segh godh luktilse. 77 Min jomfrw maria thin twnge xris ofuer al the tre thar frwct bxre for huart thz oord hon taladhe thy at thz var xx nokrom til gagn Oc sengom til skadha Oc vare the liofuare at h0Ora an sotaste fructe ath smaka. 78 Min jomfrw maria thin mwnder xris ofuer alt thz blomste til ar lofwins thyne vcerra ofuer rosa fxgrynd for thz oordhit thw angle- nom suaradhe tha gudh sialfwer sins hedhers vilia thik kunnoghade mz thik at fulkompna tha han fulkompnadhe thz han hafdhe jattath pathriarchom oc thz han taladhe mz prophetom han minskadhe valdit j haelwite ok Ochte korin ij hymmerike af thins dygdelika mwntz swari. 79 Min jomfru maria thin hals thin rygger thyne arma Oc thyne axla lof hafwin ofuer lilio fxgrynd thar rat vagste af rootom thy at the aldrigh nidherbOgdos alla vprxtos af fafxngom thingom Swa som lilla turis af vadher blast Swa roi-des thina lymmi epter thxs halgha anda inskiytilsom. 80 Min jomfrw maria thyna händer oc finger lofwins ok xrins ofuer alla dyra stena thar vidher liknas thyna gxrnynga thy at the lokka- dho gudhz son til sigh apter hans signadha vilia. 81 Min jomfrw maria ofuer alt skxrasta gwl Oc renaste malm lofues thit bryst af renlek for thy at tha thz vnder korsseno af thin sons hambra liydhe drofdis oc moddis tho vilde thu haller xfter gudhz vilia the nodhana thola for sixla gagn an at han skulle thxn hardhe dodhin ey thola Oc tha hafde ey si slana vardhit aterloste. 77 sotaste fructe aut sotaste fructer OSB — 78 blomste aut blomster OSB — 
 
 
 
 
 106 12. THE OSB (A) TEXT 82 Min jomfrw maria thit vxlwiliogha hiarta ofwer al skapath keit xris oc af allom dygdom lofuis for thy at thz var til gudh brinnande madh karlek ofuer alla the thar nokon tyma varo lifuande Swa at this karleks lughi stegh op til fadhorin Oc j hannom mz this halgha anda raadhe foor nidher sonnyn thar aldhre skildis vidh fadhorin Oc j thynom jomfrulikom ina1fuom thok han mandom mz synom gud- dom. 83 Min jomfrw maria lofuins thyna foter ofwer alla mer thxr syna dygdh ey mista af thy at the frwct af segh gifua thy at the baaro j thynom likama inneluktan son ok heelan [Ok helan] jomfrwdom Oc the gingo mOghz hOwiskelika swa at hovart thz fixt the stighu thxktos konnvngenom af hymmerike Oc glxdhi giordhe allo hymmerikis hxrskapi. 84 Thz rwmit thin son j laa myn jomfrw sancta maria gudhz modher thz nere fadhorin madh thom sama sonenom Ok thxn halghe ande mz syne ogriplika valde Ok thz hedhre alt hymmerikis harskap mz syne snille Ok all the hxlgha kirkia mz synom sang ok lasnyng. 85 Vari thik loff are oc thak herra gudh thar hona skapadhe Ok hona till thyna modher giordhe swa monge hanne hafue nutith Ok niwte badhe godha oc onda the som thik rxdhas Ok mz karlek miskund bedhas. 86 Min herre jhesus christus Nw hafuer jak nokot talat om thyna Oc thina modher dygdelika gxrnynga Nw vil jak gxrne mz thyne hialp hwxa a myn brwt Oc myna Otalika synde hwru jak hafuer myn thyma Onyttelika fortarat mit gooz oskxllika skipat myna vinni oc frxnder likamlika xlskat Ok hwlkom lwndom jak hafuer mz mins likama lustilsom myna sial skadhat Och hwru jak hafuer til sixl oc likama gooz alla hedher androm skadhat Ok hwlkom lwndom jak hafuer mot tham dygdelika gudhenom brwtit thz angra mik af allo 82 hedh post hixrta del. OSB — th ante kot del. OSB — 83 ok heelan Ok helan OSB — 84 thz post maria del. OSB 
 
 
 
 
 §§ 82-87 107 hiarto Oc vill jak mik mz thyne hialp gxrne batre Oc aldhre optare swa gOra hialp mik thar til the rena jomfrw maria jhesu christi modher hwlke thar vari lof hedher ok 'era mz thynom vxlsignada son alzwalloghom gudh Ewcerdelika for ytan 'enda. Amen. 87 Speciosa facta es. Vxlskapt ok south xst thu vorden j jomfrudoms lust halghe gudhz modher hwilken syons dotter hafue seet va2lcionen- de bland rosene blomster oc dalene lilier Oc altz halligst predikat Och drotnyngene hafue lofuet hanne. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PART C Indexes and Concordance Tables 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 13. Index of words In the following list have been indexed those words which are not in K. E. Georges's Ausfährliches lateinisch-deutsches Handwörterbuch 1-2 (Hanover- Leipzig 1913-1918) and also some words which are indeed in Georges's lexicon but have meanings which differ considerably from those listed there. No words are included here which differ from those in Georges's lexicon only as regards their spellings. Whenever a meaning of an indexed word is so frequent in mediaeval texts that it has been recorded in the majority of the current dictionaries of mediaeval Latin, no reference to any suck dictionary is given in the list; when a meaning is less frequent, references are given in parentheses and the abbreviations below have been used for this purpose. It is always mentioned explicitly when a word or its meaning is in none of the current dictionaries. Abbreviations for the references: 42(-50) refers to the E. text on pp. 63 f.; Å 1(403) refers to the A text on pp. 65 ff.; OSB 1(-87) refers to the OSB (A) text on pp. 93 ff. References to the introduction are preceded by "chapter", "section" or "subsection". When a reference is given to the extensive section 8.7, the relevant passage discussed there is always mentioned in parentheses, e.g. sect 8.7 (A 46). Abbreviations for dictionaries: Ai = F. Arnaldi, Latinitatis Italicae medii aevi . . . lexicon imperfectum I-IV, Brussels 1939-70. — Be = A. Blaise & H. Chirat, Dictionnaire Latin- Franais des auteurs chr&iens, Strasburg 1954. — BeL = A. Blaise, Lexicon latinitatis medii aevi (Corpus Christianorum, Continuatio Mediaeualis), Turnhout 1975. — Bl = A. Bartal, Glossarium mediae et infimae latinitatis regni Hungariae, Budapest 1901. — Bt = F. Blatt, Saxonis Gesta Danorum II, Index verborum, Copenhagen 1957. — Du Cange = C. Du Fresne Du Cange & L. Favre, Glossarium mediae et infimae Latinitatis I-IX, Niort 1883- 87, repr. Graz 1954. — GMLS = Glossarium mediae latinitatis Sueciae I sqq., Stockholm 1968 ff. — Hl = E. Habel & F. Gröbel, Mittellateinisches Glossar, Paderborn 1959. — Hm = M. Hammarström, Glossarium till Finlands och Sveriges latinska medeltidsurkunder jämte språklig inledning, Helsinki 1925. — Hs = R. Hakamies, Glossarium latinitatis medii aevi Finlandicae, Helsinki 1958. — Lm = R.E. Latham, Revised Medieval Latin Word-list, London 1965. — LmDict = R.E. Latham, Dictionary of Medieval Latin from British Sources 1 ff., London 1975 ff. — MW = Mittellateinisches Wörterbuch 1 ff., Munich 1959 ff. — NGML = Novum glossarium mediae latinitatis, Copenhagen 1957 ff. — NH = E. Nyrin- Heuman, Källkritiska, textkritiska och språkliga studier till Ericus Olai: Chronica Go- thorum, Diss., Lund 1944. — Nn = Latinskt-svenskt Glossarium efter cod. Ups. C 20, ed. E. Neuman (SFSS 45), Uppsala 1918 ff. — Nr = J.F. Niermeyer, Mediae latinitatis lexicon minus, Leiden 1954-76. — Sr = A. Souter, A Glossary of Later Latin to 600 A.D., Oxford 1949. — TLL = Thesaurus linguae Latinae I sqq., Leipzig 1900 ff. 
 
 
 
 
 112 accrescencia -e, f., 'increase', `growth', A 15. actor -oris, m., = auctor, A 23. aduocata -e, f., 'patroness', 'intercessor', `advocate' (of St. Mary), A 32. aliquatenus, adv., in negative clauses 'at all', 'on any occasion' (cf. TLL 1,1606,35 ff.; Hm; LmDict), Å 31. anhelitus -us, m., 'breath', see section 8,4. caritatiue, adv., `charitably', lovingly, A 31, 42. confusio -onis, f., 'shame', `disgrace', A 51. cordialiter, adv., `sincerely' (BeL, Bl, Du Cange, GMLS, Lm, cf. Bergh, Rev. VII, p. 217), Å 98. curia -e, f., celestis curia, 'hosts of heaven' (GMLS, Hl, Hs, cf. Bergh, Rev. VII, p. 217), E 45, A 31, 85, 89, 101. debitum -i, n., ex debito, 'according to one's obligations' (Hl, cf. Lm), A 64. delectanter, adv., 'with pleasure' (Ai, Be, Sr), Å 100. discrete, adv., 'prudently' (BeL, Bl, GMLS, Hs, Lm), Å 10. existere, v., auxiliary (with complement), 49 bis, A 8, 9, 10 (bis), 16, 21 (cf. cod. A': portata fuisti), 28, 29, 30, 32, 86, 99, 101 (bis); verb of full meaning A 31, 54. extrenuus -a -um, adj., 'active', `strenuous' (GMLS), Å 78 (see sect. 8.7). gloriari, v., in a passive sense 'be glorified', `be exalted' (Ai, BeL, GMLS, Lm, Nr, Sr, cf. Bergh, Rev. VII, p. 218, cf. TLL 6,2,2099,10 ff.), A 92 (cf. A 100; cf. glori- ficari, Å 64, 68, 99). hanelitus -us, see anhelitus. iocundus -a -um, adj., 'happy', about the person who has the feeling, not about the cause of the feeling, cf. TLL 7,2,594,82 ff. (GLMS), A 101. maternaliter, adv., 'in a motherly fashion', `maternally' (in NGML there is the mean- ing 'comme une rnre', `maternellement', but in the only example quoted there rna- ternaliter has the meaning 'in one's native language', cf. Du Cange for the NGML example; other dictionaries of mediaeval Latin seem not to have listed the word), Å 13. mentalis -e, adj., 'mental', 'of the mind', A 2. 13. INDEX OF WORDS paternaliter, adv., 'as a father' (BeL, Bl, Hm, Hs, Lm, NH, Sr, cf. Bergh, Rev. VII, p. 218), A 28. preordinacio -onis, f., 'pre-arrangement' (Be, Bl, Lm, cf. Bergh, Rev. VII, p. 219, and Eklund, SA, p. 141), A 99. purgatorium -i, n., 'the Purgatory' A 103. recommendare, v., 'recommend', 'com- mend', A 18. reuereri, v., in a passive sense 'be venerat- ed', A 82, 91. roboracio -onis, f., `strengthening' (Ai, BeL, Du Cange, Lm. [N.B. roboracio fi- det Nr; cf. Eklund, RS, p. 235), A 25. seriosus -a -um, adj., A 33. Mediaeval dic- tionaries give the meaning `serious' (Be, Bl, Du Cange, Hl, Hm, Hs, Lm, Nr, Sr) but here in A 33, cum narracione seriosa, the meaning `detailed' seems more appro- priate (cf. the meaning 'in detail' of the adverb seriose, BeL, Bl, Du Cange, Hm, Hs, Lm, Nr; cf. Bergh, Rev. VII, p. 219, and Rev. V, p. 178 [especially Rev. VII 15:R vidit rapta in spiritu totam passionem Domini seriose and A&P, p. 386, serio- sius et clarius vidit natiuitatem Domini]). stare, v., in a weak sense, more or less similar to esse, A 12, 47, (52); verb of full meaning Å 98 (cf. sect. 14.6, Syntactical structures, Predicative adjective). valere, v., 'be able to', E 42 minime valet (=4 81 nequeunt), A 85. velle, v., 'consent to' (of things which the person obviously did not desire; this use seems not to have been indexed in current dictionaries), A 50 ligno crucis affigi vo- luisti (of Christ), passim. vicis -is, f., 'time', 'occasion' (BeL, Hl, Hm, Lm, Sr; cf. Bergh, Rev. VII, p. 220), A 4 quadam vice 'once', 'on one occasion'. virtuosus -a -um, adj., `virtuous', A 6, 25, 31 63, 84, 96 bis. 
 
 
 
 
 14. Grammatical index The abbreviations for the references are the same as those used in the index of words. For frequent phenomena I just give examples. 14.1. Nominal words 14.1.1. Nouns dies, gender: masculine A 23, feminine A 2, 60. 14.1.2. Adjectives, adverbs, numerals Adjective replacing a genitivus obiectivus (cf. Szantyr, p. 66): Å 12 diuini amoris, A 61 amorem diuinum. Asyndetic coordination (or sub—ordination ?) of adjectives: A 44 immundis manibus ra- pacibus, A 50 toto tuo glorioso corpore cruentato, Å 70 benedicte nares tue suauis- sime, Å 77 benedictum cor tuum regale et magnificum. Comparison: (1) the superlative A 100 vir- ginissima (cf. Du Cange; BeL) is derived either from virgineus or, which seems more likely, from the adjectival use of virgo, for which see sect. 8.7 (Å 100). (2) comparison by means of magis (cf. Szan- tyr, p. 165), Ed' 49 magis apta. (3) prefer- ence for the positive or the superlative of different adjectives, sect. 8.7 (A 14). dignus: dignum est, vt . . . (cf. Szantyr, p. 645), Å 77. eternus/eternaliter, preference for the ad- verb: sect. 8.7 (the third passage from A 69). virgo used as an adjective: A 100 venter tuus virgo et fecundissimus (see sect. 8.7, cf. Comparison above). vnus in a weak sense, similar to an infinite articie (cf. Szantyr, p. 193): A 35 in cor- pus vnius virginis. 14.1.3. Pronouns Possessive pronouns: in the sense of an ob- jective genitive (cf. Szantyr, p. 66): A 87 a tua visione (A 83 cum magno dolore tuo ?); (2) omissions of possessive pronouns, sect. 8.7 (A 86). idem in a weak sense similar to a definite articie (cf. Szantyr, p. 192): A 79 eisdem membris tuis, Å 92 eidem naso tuo, A 94 eodem ore tuo. ille: (1) in a weak sense similar to is: 90 illas; (2) similar to a definite articie: 102 cella illa (?); (3) difference between ille and ipse: sect. 8.7 (the second passage from A 69). ipse: (1) in a weak sense (= is; cf. Szantyr, p. 190): E 49 (= A 10) ipsum . . . amare . . . incepisti, A 55 ipsum (= spiritum), 77 pro defensione ipsorum, A 97 aqua ipsorum, passim; (2) in a weak sense simi- lar to a definite articie (cf. Szantyr, p. 192): A 15 ipsum tuum filium; Å 91 ipse aures; A 93 ipsa lingua; (3) difference between ille and ipse: sect. 8.7 (the sec- ond passage from d 69). omnis . . . nullus = nullus . . . vllus: A 93 Nam omne verbum, quod lingua tua pro- tulit, nulli persone vmquam nocuit (cf. Szantyr, p. 453; TLL 9,2,617,3 ff.). qui (erroneously ?) for quia in the combina- tion of quia . . . ideo (idcirco): sect. 8.7 (the first passage from A 69). quilibet `each' (not `anyone'): Å 55 pro qua- libet hora; A 101 de quolibet . . . vestigio. sibi = ei: Å 3. suus = eius: A 19 cum suo glorioso latere. 14.1.4. Cases Analytic cases: A 54 spem de venia. Genitive: (1) emphasizing: A 66 rex regum et dominus dominancium, A 103 secula seculorum; (2) describing: A 16 veritatis testes = "truth-witnesses" (not objective 
 
 
 
 
 114 = "witnesses of the truth"), see sect. 8.7; (3) coordination of an adjective and a partitive genitive: A 95 aliquid vtile vel honoris Dei (sect. 8.7). Vocative, combined with the interjection o: Å 27 o domina mea Virgo Maria (and passim; sect. 8.7). 14.2. Verbs 14.2.1. Inflexion deridi = derideri, change of conjugation: 46 te deridi permisisti, see sect. 8.7. moderare = moderari: Å 10 moderasti. reuereri in a passive sense: e 82 reuereantur, 91 reuereantur. 14.2.2. Constructions exinanire (or se exinanire ?) alqa re, loose something': A 52 corpus tuum . . . suis totis viribus exinaniuit in cruce. iudicare alqm ad alqd, `condemn somebody to something': A 50 ad crucis mortem iu- dicatus fuisti. petere with the accusative and infinitive (cf. Szantyr, p. 356): Å 49 voces populi peten- tis reum latronem absolui. promerere alci alqd, `procure something for somebody': z 5. sufferre, `endure', with the accusative and infinitive: A 47. sustinere, vt, `endure that': A 51 (with the accusative and infinitive: Å 79). 14.2.3. Tenses and moods Tenses in general: (1) fui = sum: E', 48 fuisti mancipata, A 21 separata fuisti, A 35 mis- sus fuisti, A 50 iudicatus fuisti, passim; (2) the future indicative (and present sub- junctive) in exhortations (cf. Eklund, RS, p 75131): E 42 benedicentur lumbi tui et laudentur (=A 81 benedicantur innocen- tissimi lumbi tui et laudentur), E 44 bene- dicentur (=A 83 benedicantur); (3) debere as an auxiliary (cf. Eklund, RS, p. 239): A 17; (4) A 52 eras . . . flagellatus et . . . sauciatus... erat lacerata is probably not an instance of the pluperfect instead of the perfect (es . . . flagellatus etc.); flagel- latus, sauciatus and lacerata should prob- ably be regarded as adjectives, not parti- 14. GRAMMATICAL INDEX ciples, with the predicate in the imperfect (cf. the preceding imperfects). Indirect interrogations: (1) with the sub- junctive: A 11 non curasti, quis te despon- saret; (2) with the indicative: Å 24 videre meruisti, qualiter . . . illustrauit. filius . . . transmisit et Relative clauses: (1) indicative in relative clauses with a causal sense: E 49 (and A 10) Laus sit tibi . . que . . . amare . . . incepisti, Å 11 Infinita gloria sit tibi . . que virginitatem tuam ipsi Deo humiliter vouisti, passim, frequent; (2) indicative in relative clauses with a consecutive sense: Å 87 nullus fidelis . . . te aspiciebat, qui non aliquam consolacionem . . . sibi in- fundi senciebat, maybe also A 22 qui . . . pertulit. 14.2.4. Participles, gerund Present participle: the accusative with a pre- sent participle seems to be comparatively frequent, e.g. Å 16 filium tuum predican- tem . . . facientem et . . . eligentem . . . vi- disti, Å 18 filium tuum... loquentem . . . conspexisti et... clamantem et... recom- mendantem . . . audiuisti, Å 19 filium tuum in cruce pendentem . . . vidisti, A 23 (filium) resurgentem et . . . triumphantem vidisti. Gerund: (1) the ablative of the gerund re- placing the present participle: 49 amare . . . incepisti . . . distinguendo . . . quoque (= -que)... temperando, Å 12 salutando . . . annunciabat, passim; (2) a gerund governed by a preposition and followed by an accusative (cf. D. Norberg, Syntak- tische Forschungen auf dem Gebiete des Spätlateins . . . [Uppsala universitets årsskrift 1943:91, Uppsala 1943, pp. 206 ff.): Å 62 venturus es . . . ad iudicandum animas omnium viuorum (the accusative after a gerund without any preposition: A 24 augendo . . . feruorem et . . . rectitu- dinem, A 97 Filium Dei lactando). 14.3. Prepositions See also 14.1.4, Cases, Analytic cases and 14.6 Syntactical structures, Attributive adjuncts. 
 
 
 
 
 115 de with a causal meaning: Å 25 de tua leticia: A 101 de . . . quolibet . . . vestigio. in with the ablative denoting direction (cf. Szantyr, pp. 276 f., TLL 7,1,797,71 ff.): A 9 in templo . . . portata fuisti (or "in the Temple"?, cf. E 48 a<d> templum . . . ferebaris and OSB 48 j mOnstrom offra-. dhis), Å 61 Sanctum Spiritum in discipu- lorum cordibus (corda Ee!) transmisisti, (passim). pro: pro eo, quod, see sect. 14.5.2, Subordi- nating conjunctions, quod. 14.4. Adverbs Adverbial expressions (eternaliter) pre- ferred to adjectival expressions (eternus): sect. 8.7 (the third passage from Å 69). sicut = quam (cf. Szantyr, p. 595): A 7 nullus . . . tam intime eum dilexit sicut tu. 14.5. Conjunctions 14.5.1. Coordinating conjunctions -que, the meaning is weakened or lost: ideo- que = ideo (cf. Szantyr, p. 475), A 5. quoque 'and' (= -que, cf. Szantyr, p. 485): 49 diei noctisque tempora . . . distin- guendo sompnum quoque ac cibum . . . temperando (OSB 49 Oc alla tyma dagh oc nat thw markte . . . oc gaft . . . sompn och mat [cf. A 10]), Å 37 (Christus), qui carnem tuam immaculatam circumcidi, te quoque Ihesum vocari et a matre tua in templo offerri voluisti (OSB 5 thxr lxt thik omskxre Oc jhesum kalla oc konnvnga til thin ath komme oc thxr xfter j monster offra), probably also A 28, 51, 59, 60. sed, see 14.6, Syntactical structures, Coordi- nation, Å 64. 14.5.2. Subordinating conjunctions dum: (1) 'when' (= cum): E 48 dum ablac- tata eras, . . . ad templum ferebaris, E 49 dum . . . deuenisses, . . . incepisti (= Å 10 cum . . . peruenisti, . . . incepisti), Å 41 dum . . . placuit, A 79 dum . . . sustinuisti; (2) 'as long as' with the perfect tense, subordinate to a main clause with the im- perfect tense (cf. Szantyr, p. 612): A 90 dum . . . fuisti. quamuis with the indicative: Å 64 quamuis . . . scio, A 85 quamuis... certa sum, A 92 quamuis... dormiebas, A 98 quamuis . . . diligebas, Å 99 quamuis . . . humanatus . . . fuit; no instance with the subjunctive. quatenus introducing a final noun clause: A 2 Cum . . . Birgitta . . . peteret et rogaret Deum, quatenus... quia, see 14.1.3, Pronouns, qui; sect. 8.7 (A 16, note 32). quod: (1) introducing noun-clauses depend- ing on verba dicendi etc., equivalent to the accusative and infinitive construction: A 11 sciebas, quod ille . . . melior erat, passim; (2) introducing consecutive ad- verb clauses with the indicative or the subjunctive: Å 4 Quas . . . ita memoriter tenuit, quod cottidie eas . . . legabat, A 10 cum ad illam etatem peruenisti, quod . . . intelligeres, Å 10 sompnum . . . et cibum . . . taliter moderasti, quod existeres semper apta, A 31 opera virtuosa tam cari- tatiue se nouit fecisse, quod Deum . . . oportuit te . . . venerari, A 32 (Deus) te ad tantum honorem creauit, quod tu . . . do- mina fleres, A 52 sic eras . . . sauciatus, quod caro . . . erat... lacerata, Å 99 (cor) ita ardentissimum erat . . quod flamma . . . conscendit; (3) pro eo, quod `because' (cf. Szantyr, pp. 580 and 583): Å 59, 75, 80. vt, consecutive, in a weak sense (cf. Szantyr, pp. 644 ff.): Å 98 maluisti . . . illam penam . . . sustinere (Filium tuum), vt scilicet . . . moreretur. 14.6. Syntactical structures Anacoluthon: E 46 cuius tu es . . . optima creatura nullusque tam intime . . . ipsum diligebat and A 7 cuius tu . . . es optima creatura et nullus . . . eum dilexit sicut tu (or, maybe, cuius . . . tu is intended as a main clause, i.e. there should be a semi- colon or a full stop before cuius?), A 8 ab illo angelo, quo christus tibi nunciatus fuit, ab eodem eciam tu . . . nunciata fuisti, A 35 Gloria et laus sit tibi, Domine mi Ihesu Christe, qui in corpus vnius virginis a Patre missus fuisti manens tamen cum Patre semper in celo et Pater cum sua 
 
 
 
 
 116 diuinitate manens in tua humanitate inse- parabiliter tecum in mundo (Pater . . . manens could be regarded as a nomina- tive absolute or manens could be taken as an equivalent of a finite form, but it seems more likely that Pater... manens is just an incorrect extension of the preced- ing correct construction qui . . . fuisti manens, i.e. an anacoluthon), Å 45 Bene- dictus sis tu . . ., qui... ductus fuisti; et tu, qui es iudex omnium, . . . permisisti, A 64 quamuis . . . scio... sed quia... ideo; see also 14.1.3, Pronouns, qui. Asyndeton, see subsect. 14.1.2, Adjectives, adverbs, numerals. Attributive adjuncts, prepositions depend- ing on nouns: E 42 mundiciam in celo, 33 narracione . . . de . . . incarnacione, passim. Coordination of syntactically disparate ex- pressions: Å 47 Gloria sit tibi . . . pro derisione, quam sustinuisti, dum . . . co- ronatus stetisti, et quia in faciem . . . con- spui . . . sustulisti (the quia clause is co- ordinate either with pro derisione [which seems most likely, cf. Szantyr, pp. 816 f., and H. Helander, On the Function of Abstract Nouns in Latin, Acta univ. Up- saliensis, Studia Latina Upsaliensia 11, Diss., Uppsala 1977, pp. 96 ff.] or, may- be, with the dum clause), A 49 obprobria et mendacia tibi obici ac voces populi . . . audire voluisti (coordination of the accu- sative and infinitive [obprobria et menda- cia . . . obici] with an infinitive [audire]), 14. GRAMMATICAL INDEX A 64 quamuis . . . scio . . . sed quia . . . teneor, ideo... desidero (or is quamuis an adverb?), A 79 membris tuis . . . exhibea- tur incessabilis reuerencia, laus eternaliter et gloria sempiterna (see sect. 8.7, the discussion of the third passage from Å 69), Å 95 aliquid vtile vel honoris Dei (coordination of an adjective and a parti- tive genitive, see sect. 8.7). Pleonasms: A 26 indesinenter omni hora, A 42 humilitatem (caritatem Nb K, see sect. 8.7) . . . humiliter ostendisti, A 65 primo et ante omnes, A 74 barbam speciosam in tua facie decora decenter portasti, A 76 eterna- liter sine fine, Å 78 velociter festinasti, 98 in virtute constancie firmissima persti- tisti, passim, frequent. Predicative adjective depending on another predicative adjective: A 98 sub cruce filii tui tota dolorosa stetisti (tota belongs to dolorosa not to stetisti, i.e. 'you stood under your Son's Cross, totally filled with pain'; an alternative is to take stetisti in a weakened sense [= fuisti], in which case tota belongs to the predicate dolorosa ste- tisti = dolorosa fuisti, 'you were totally in pain'; however, the words sub cruce ren- der the former solution more likely, since they suggest that stetisti has its full mean- ing). Word order: (1) Cursus: sect. 8.2 and Å 66 tue subiaceant et obediant potestati (see sect. 8.7); (2) sit tibiltibi sit: Å 10 and passim (see sect 8.7). 
 
 
 
 
 15, Index of persons and places In this index are brought together the narres of persons and places mentioned in the Latin text (the various designations of God, Christ and the Devil are not indexed). The asterisk * denotes that the person or place is not mentioned by name. The abbreviations for the references are the same as those used in the index of veords. Angel, who announced the birth of St. Mary to her parents and the birth of Christ to St. Mary and Joseph, Ii 47, Å 8, 12, OSB 47, 51. Anna, mother of St. Mary, E 47*, 48*, Å 8*, 9*, OSB 47*, 48*. Barabbas, the criminal released instead of Christ, Å 49*, OSB 15*. Birgitta of Sweden, Saint, A 1, 2, 6, 33, 63, 84, OSB 1. Caiaphas, HighPriest of Jerusalem, Å 45, OSB 12. Criminal, i.e. one of the two criminals hanged together with Christ, A 54, OSB 19. Egypt, A 15, OSB 54. Golgotha, A 50*, OSB 16*. Herod Antipas, Å 46, OSB 12. HighPriest at the temple of Jerusalem, E 48, A 9, OSB 48. Jews, Jewish people, Å 25, 44, 51, OSB 63. Joachim, father of St. Mary, E. 47*, 48*, A 8*, 9*, OSB 47*, 48. John, Saint and Apostle, A 21, 53*, OSB 19*, 60. John the Baptist, Saint, A 38, OSB 7*. Jordan River, Å 38. Joseph, Saint, Christ's earthly father, Å 15, OSB 6*, 54*. Judas Iscariot, A 44*, 70, OSB 31. Lazarus (of Bethany), Å 70, OSB 31. Mary, the mother of Christ, Et 46-49, Å 3, 4, 6, 7 and passim, OSB 46, 47, 48, 49 and passim. Nazareth, Å 15, OSB 54. Pilate, Pontius, Å 45, 46 bis, 48, 49, OSB 12 bis, 14, 15, 23, 59. Samson, A 79, OSB 40. Sweden, Å 1. The three Wise Men, who brought gifts to Christ, Å 14, OSB 5, 53. 
 
 
 
 
 16. Index of quotations and reminiscences In this index are brought together those quotations and reminiscences which are accounted for in the apparatuses of the E and Å texts. I do not claim that the collection of quotations and reminiscences is complete (see also Chapter 9). St. Birgitta Rev. I 9, cf. Å 6 - I 10:17 sqq., cf. A 19 - I 10:22-23, cf. A 52 - I 10:23, cf. A 53 - I 10:34-36, A 20 - I 10:37, A 21 - I 27:4, cf. Å 18 - I 27:5 sqq., cf. Å 19 - I 35:5 sqq., cf. Å 19 - I 39:2-3, A 43 - I 54:36, cf. A 60 - II 21 A, cf. Å 19, cf. A 59 - II 25 B-C, cf. Å 95 - III 13 F, cf. A 19 - IV 23 B, A 28 - IV 70, cf. A 19 - IV 81 H, Å 43 - V int. 9:1, cf. E 46, A 32 - V int. 9:8-12, cf. E 46, A 32 - VI 10 C, Å 48 - VI 36 A-B, A 24 - VI 49, cf. Å 6 - VI 55, cf. Å 6 - VI 61, A 25 - VI 62, cf. A 27 - VI 62 A, cf. A 26 - VI 62 B, A 29 - VI 94 A, A 22 - VII 15:13-17, cf. A 53 - VII 27:22, A 48 SA 2:7, cf. Å 24 - 4:15-19, cf. E 46, Å 7 - 10:7, cf. E 47, Å 8 - 13:19-24, cf. E 46, A 7 - 17:6 sqq., cf. A 17 - 17:6, cf. Å 13 - 18:14, cf. A 18 - 18:21, cf. A 56-57, A 76, Å 79 - 19:8-9, A 22 - 20:15, cf. E. 46, A 7 Legenda Aurea LIV (pp. 239-242), A 22 LIV (pp. 241 sq.), A 22 DOM (pp. 318 sqq.), cf. A 23 CXXXI (pp. 587 sq.), cf. E 47, A 8 CXXXI (pp. 588 sq.), cf. E 48, A 9 MDB 1062a (4, p. 328), A 37, A 38, A 41 SvB 31,2-3 (p. 77), cf. A 52 31,5 (p. 78), cf. A 54 31,6 (p. 79), cf. A 53 31,7 (p. 79); 122,39 (p. 248), cf. A 52 122,3 (p. 243), A 36 122,8 et 10 (pp. 243 sq.), A 37 122,15 (p. 245), A 38 122,16 (p. 245), A 41 122,21 (p. 245), A 42 122,26 (p. 246); 122, 30 (p. 247), Å 47-48 122,27 (p. 246), A 45 122,28 (p. 246), A 46 122,30 vide 122,26 122,31 (p. 247), A 49 122,32 (p. 247), cf. A 50 122,34 (p. 247), cf. A 51 122,36 (p. 248), cf. A 54 122,37 (p. 248), cf. A 53 122,39, vide 31,7 122,41 (p. 248), cf. A 55 122,43 (p. 249), cf. A 58 122,45-46 (p. 249), cf. A 59 122,48-50 (p. 250), A 60 Vulgata iud. 14-16, Å 79 Matth. 1,18-25, E", 47, Å 8 - 1,25, A 37 - 2,1-12, A 14 - 2,13-23, A 15 
 
 
 
 
 119 - 3,13-17, A 38 - 4,1-11, A 41 - 26,14-15, A 44 - 26,17-29, A 42 - 26,57, A 45 - 26,67; 27,28-30, A 47-48 - 27,2, A 45 - 27,21-23, A 49 - 27,26-44, A 50-51 - 27,28-30, vide 26,67 - 27,46, A 18 - 27,57-66, A 20 - 27,57-58, A 58 - 28,9-10; 28,16-20, A 60 - 28,9-10, A 22 - 28,16-20, vide 28,9-10 Marc. 1,9-11, A 38 1,12-13, A 41 1,16-20, A 16 14,10-11, A 44 14,12-25, A 42 - 14,53, A 45 - 14,65; 15,17-19, A 47-48 - 15,1, A 45 15,11-14, A 49 15,15-32, A 50-51 15,17-19, vide 14,65 15,34, A 18 15,42-47, A 20 15,42-45, A 58 16,9-19, A 60 - 16,9-18, A 22 16,19, A 23 Luc. 1,26-38, i-1 47, A 8, A 94 - 1,26-37, A 12 - 1,38, A 12 - 2,6, A 13 - 2,21-39, A 37 - 2,22-39, A 14 - 2,51, A 14, 15 - 3,21-22, A 38 - 4,1-13, A 41 - 5,27-29, A 16 - 22,3-6, A 44 - 22,7-38, A 42 - 22,44, A 43 - 22,54, A 45 - 22,63-65; 23,11, A 47-48 - 23,1, A 45 - 23,7, A 46 - 23,11, A 46; vide 22,63 - 23,18-23, A 49 - 23,24-39, A 50-51 - 23,39-43, A 54 - 23,46, A 18, A 55 - 23,50-56, A 20 - 23,50-52, A 58 - 24,13-51, A 22, A 60 - 24,51, A 23 Ioh. 1,37-51, A 16 - 11,39, A 70 - 13,1-38, A 42 - 13,2, A 44 - 18,22; 19,1-3; 19,5, A 47-48 - 18,24, A 45 - 18,28, A 45 - 18,39-40, A 49 - 19,1-3, vide 18,22 - 19,5, vide 18,22 - 19,16-24, A 50-51 - 19,17, A 75 - 19,25-27, A 53 - 19,25, A 17 - 19,26, A 18 - 19,34, A 58 - 19,38-42, A 20 - 19,38, A 58 - 20,14-21,23, A 22, A 60 act. 1,3-11, A 60 - 1,9-11, A 23 - 2,1 sqq., A 24, A 61 
 
 
 
 
 17. Concordance tables The Latin Å text has one order of the prayers, the fragmentary Latin E text and the Old Swedish text, A, have another order (see section 8.5). Not only is the order of the four prayers different, but there are often differences concerning the division into paragraphs as well and, accordingly, it was necessary to give one numbering to the A text and another numbering to the E and A texts. In concordance table A are given in the first column the paragraphs of the A text in straightforward order (A 1-103) and in the second column the corresponding paragraphs of the E and A texts. In concordance table B, the numbers of the E and A texts are in straightforward order in column one (S A 1-87), the corresponding A numbers in column two. The E text is fragmentary and there have survived only §§ 42-50; they have been printed in bold print in both the tables. Paragraph A 32 = E A 69 is the last paragraph of the Oracio prima of the A text but the first paragraph of the prayer Bön till jungfru Marie lemmar in the A text, a fact which is difficult to show consistently in the concordance tables. 
 
 
 
 
 121 Concordance Table A Latin Å Latin E Swedish A Prohe- 1 - mium 2 3 4 5 1 Oracio 6 prima 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 j 25 26 27 28 29 30} 31 j 32 — Bön till 46 Jungfru 47 Maria 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 Oracio 33 secunda 34 35 36 Incipit 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 — 2 3 4 Bön till Kristi pina och död Latin E Swedish A Latin A 37 5 — 6 381 7 39 40 41 8 42 9 43 10 44 11 45. 12 46 47 13 48 14 49 15 50 16 51 17 52 18 53 19 54 5520 56 [ 21 57, 58 22 59 23 60 - 24 61 62, Oracio 63 64 tercia 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 — Bön till 25 Kristi 26 lekamen 27 28 29 30 31 32 Latin E Swedish A Latin A 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 — Oracio 84 quarta 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 — — 33 34 36 35 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 — — 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 — 81 82 — 83 84 85 86 87 Bön till Jungfru Marie lemmar 
 
 
 
 
 122 17. CONCORDANCE TABLES Concordance Table B Latin E Swedish A Incipit 1 Latin Å f 1 2 3 4 ,5 Prohe- mium 33 Oracio 34 secunda 35 36 37 — 38 39 40 41 8 42 9 10 43 44 11 12 <- 45 46 47 13 14 48 15 49 50 16 51 17 18 52 19 t53 54 20V55 21 j 56 ,57 22 58 23 59 24 /60 61 62 Bön till — 2 Kristi pina 3 och död 4 5 6 7 Latin E Swedish A Latin A Bön till — Kristi 25 lekamen 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 63 Oracio 64 tercia 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 — Bön till — Jungfru 46 Maria 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 6 Oracio 7 prima 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 Latin 21 Swedish A Latin Å 59 20 21 60 61 22 62 <- 23 24 25 63 64 26 27 65 66 28 29 67 68 <- 30 U31 Bön till 69 Jungfru — Marie — lemmar 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 — 81 82 — 83 84 85 86 87 32 Oracio 84 quarta 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 — — 
 
 
 
